Rhizosphere effects of Parthenium hysterophorus on soil nutrient availability and microbial life-history strategies | BMC Plant Biology | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhizosphere effects of Parthenium hysterophorus on soil nutrient availability and microbial life-history strategies 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 29 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhizosphere effects of Parthenium hysterophorus on soil nutrient availability and microbial life-history strategies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aomei Jia 1   na1 , Hanzhi Wang 1   na1 , Fei Yan 1 , Jingying Lu 2 , Xianyong Dong 2 , Lin Zhang 3 , Ran Xue  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0002-2728-2047 1 & … Lin Liu  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5023-5906 1   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background Biological invasions impose substantial ecological and economic costs worldwide, yet research on invasive plants has often emphasized changes in aboveground plant communities, with comparatively less attention to belowground microbial communities, particularly those inhabiting the rhizosphere, a biogeochemical hotspot where plant-soil-microbe interactions are most intense. To address this gap, we compared the invasive Parthenium hysterophorus with the co-occurring native grass Cynodon dactylon in a reservoir drawdown zone of the lower Jinsha River, quantifying rhizosphere soil physicochemical properties, extracellular enzyme activities, bacterial and fungal community attributes, and microbial ecological strategies. Results Compared with C. dactylon , P. hysterophorus was associated with higher soil water content, available phosphorus, microbial biomass carbon and nitrogen, and greater leucine aminopeptidase and alkaline phosphatase activities; although bacterial α-diversity, community-weighted mean rrn copy number, and fungal Shannon diversity remained largely unchanged, the fungal copiotroph/oligotroph increased, while bacterial and fungal taxa exhibited distinct environmental associations, with key bacterial genera primarily related to soil water availability, microbial biomass, β-glucosidase, and leucine aminopeptidase activity, and key fungal genera associated mainly with soil organic carbon, nitrate nitrogen, and N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase activity. Conclusions P. hysterophorus is associated with a distinct rhizosphere environment characterized by enhanced nutrient mobilization and selective microbial assembly, particularly of specific fungal taxa such as Septoglomus , Mortierella , and Poaceascoma , suggesting that coordinated shifts in rhizosphere resource acquisition and fungal community composition may represent an important belowground pathway facilitating its establishment and persistence in environmentally dynamic reservoir drawdown zones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How does Parthenium hysterophorus alter rhizosphere microbial communities? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What roles do rhizosphere microbes play in invasive plant establishment? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plant species shape the structure and function of rhizobacterial communities in arid grasslands
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 26 September 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Root traits of host plants regulated the rhizosphere fungal community structures both under ambient and long-term N and P enrichment conditions in a temperate steppe
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 25 March 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Plant-specific microbial diversity facilitates functional redundancy at the soil-root interface
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 05 December 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Arbuscular mycorrhiza 
 
 
 
 Microbial Ecology 
 
 
 
 Rhizobial symbiosis 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 Soil Microbiology 
 
 
 
 Fungal ecology 
 
 
 
 Impacts of Invasive Plants on Soil Microbial Communities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements The authors thank China Three Gorges Construction Engineering Corporation for providing support and permission for field sampling. Funding This work was supported by the Research Projects of China Three Gorges Construction Engineering Corporation (JG-EP-0426001 and JG-EP-0426002). Author information Author notes Aomei Jia and Hanzhi Wang contributed equally to this work. Authors and Affiliations College of Grassland Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, 611130, China Aomei Jia, Hanzhi Wang, Fei Yan, Ran Xue & Lin Liu China Three Gorges Construction Engineering Corporation, Beijing, 101100, China Jingying Lu & Xianyong Dong CAS Key Laboratory of Mountain Ecological Restoration and Bioresource Utilization & Ecological Restoration and Biodiversity Conservation Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, 610041, China Lin Zhang Authors Aomei Jia View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Hanzhi Wang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Fei Yan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Jingying Lu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xianyong Dong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lin Zhang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ran Xue View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lin Liu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Ran Xue or Lin Liu . Ethics declarations 
 
 Declarations 
 No seeds or cultivated plant materials were used in this study. Rhizosphere and bulk soil samples were collected from naturally occurring populations of Parthenium hysterophorus and Cynodon dactylon in Yuanmou County, Yunnan Province, China, with permission from the relevant research project of China Three Gorges Construction Engineering Corporation. The two plant species were identified in the field by Wang Hanzhi. No voucher specimens were deposited because no intact plant materials were collected. The field study complied with local associations and institutional guidelines, and neither species is listed as endangered or protected under CITES. 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Supplementary Material 1 (download PDF ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Jia, A., Wang, H., Yan, F. et al. Rhizosphere effects of Parthenium hysterophorus on soil nutrient availability and microbial life-history strategies.
 BMC Plant Biol (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09953-1 Download citation Received : 03 July 2026 Accepted : 09 September 2026 Published : 29 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09953-1 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Plant invasion 
 Parthenium hysterophorus 
 Soil nutrients Soil extracellular enzyme activity Soil microbes Life-history strategy 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Ran Xue 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How does Parthenium hysterophorus alter rhizosphere microbial communities? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What roles do rhizosphere microbes play in invasive plant establishment? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature