GEOSCIENCE CANADA
Groundwater Science and Policy in Canada:
Takeaways from an International 
Association of Hydrogeologists (IAH) 
Canada Conference Panel in 2025
Hazen A.J. Russell 1, Andrew Kirkwood 2, Christine
Rivard3, M. Cathryn Ryan4, and Cynthia N. McClain5
1Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources Canada 
601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0E8, Canada
Email: hazen.russell@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca
2Freelance Writer, 1293 Meadowlands Drive East 
Ottawa, Ontario, K2E 6K4, Canada
3Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources Canada 
490 Rue de la Couronne, Quebec City, Quebec, G1K 9A9, Canada
4Department of Earth, Energy, and Environment
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada
5IAH Canada, Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
University of Alberta, 1-26 Earth Sciences Building, Edmonton
Alberta, T6G 2E3, Canada 
SUMMARY
Groundwater provides potable water for approximately a third
of all Canadians, sustains two-thirds of the annual baseflow of
many Canadian rivers and underpins agricultural, industrial
and ecosystem functions in every province and territory. Yet
groundwater has received disproportionately little attention in
federal freshwater science, monitoring and policy compared to
surface water. The low visibility of groundwater as a topic
complicates groundwater governance and hinders advance-
ments in resource assessment, scientific understanding and
national reporting of data and research, especially given the
already complex division of federal, provincial and territorial
responsibilities related to water resources. 
In spring 2025, the Geological Survey of Canada, the
Canada Water Agency and the International Association of
Hydrogeologists – Canadian National Chapter (now IAH
Canada) co-organized a panel discussion on Public groundwater
science and policy in Canada: Challenges of jurisdiction, funding and
capacity. The panel was held at the annual Geological Associa-
tion of Canada – Mineralogical Association of Canada meet-
ing in Ottawa, which was jointly sponsored by IAH Canada.
The panel brought together federal, provincial and territorial
government representatives, conservation practitioners and
academic hydrogeologists to address four themes: 1) overcom-
ing political and policy barriers; 2) funding and capacity; 3)
data, science and monitoring needs; and 4) public awareness.
This article summarizes that panel session, providing con-
text through a brief review of the past 55 years of federal
groundwater policy conversations. It highlights issues raised by
the panellists related to governance barriers, monitoring, fund-
ing, capacity and communication, and concludes that four key
outcomes need to be pursued: 1) the inclusion of groundwater
in any renewed federal freshwater policy framework, 2) stable,
multi-year funding for groundwater science and monitoring, 3)
development of a national monitoring network, 4) formaliza-
tion of groundwater expertise within federal freshwater deci-
sion-making processes.
RÉSUMÉ
Les eaux souterraines fournissent de l’eau potable à environ un
tiers de la population canadienne, soutiennent les deux tiers de
l’écoulement de base annuel de nombreuses rivières canadi-
ennes et sont à la base des fonctions agricoles, industrielles et
écosystémiques dans chaque province et territoire. Pourtant,
les eaux souterraines ont reçu une attention disproportion-
nellement faible dans la science, la surveillance et les politiques
fédérales relatives à l’eau douce, comparativement aux eaux de
surface. La faible visibilité des eaux souterraines en tant que
sujet complique leur gouvernance et freine les avancées en
matière d’évaluation des ressources, de compréhension scien-
tifique et de rapport national des données et de la recherche —
Volume 53 2026 251
REPORT
Geoscience Canada, v. 53, https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236 pages 251–265 © His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, as represented b y the
Minister of Natural Resources, 2026.
d’autant plus que le partage des responsabilités fédérales,
provinciales et territoriales à l’égard des ressources en eau est
déjà complexe.
Au printemps 2025, la Commission géologique du Canada,
l’Agence canadienne de l’eau et l’Association internationale des
hydrogéologues – Chapitre national canadien (aujourd’hui
IAH Canada) ont coorganisé une table ronde intitulée « Sci-
ence et politique publiques des eaux souterraines au Canada :
enjeux de compétence, de financement et de capacité ». Cette
table ronde s’est tenue lors du congrès annuel conjoint de l’As-
sociation géologique du Canada et de l’Association
minéralogique du Canada, à Ottawa, événement également
commandité par IAH Canada. Elle a réuni des représentants
des gouvernements fédéral, provinciaux et territoriaux, des
praticiens de la conservation et des hydrogéologues universi-
taires autour de quatre thèmes : 1) surmonter les obstacles
politiques et réglementaires; 2) le financement et la capacité; 3)
les besoins en matière de données, de science et de surveil-
lance; et 4) la sensibilisation du public.
Cet article résume cette séance, en offrant une mise en con-
texte par un bref survol des 55 dernières années de discussions
sur les politiques fédérales relatives aux eaux souterraines. Il
met en évidence les enjeux soulevés par les panélistes concer-
nant les obstacles de gouvernance, la surveillance, le finance-
ment, la capacité et la communication, et conclut que quatre
résultats clés doivent être visés : 1) l’inclusion des eaux souter-
raines dans tout cadre renouvelé de politique fédérale sur l’eau
douce; 2) un financement stable et pluriannuel pour la science
et la surveillance des eaux souterraines; 3) l’élaboration d’un
réseau national de surveillance; 4) la formalisation de l’exper-
tise en matière d’eaux souterraines au sein des processus déci-
sionnels fédéraux relatifs à l’eau douce.
Traduit par la Traductrice
INTRODUCTION
Groundwater is an indispensable source of freshwater and a
critical component of the water cycle (Fig. 1). It plays a key
role in both natural systems and socio-economic development.
About a third of all Canadians depend on groundwater
sources for potable water, including two-thirds of those living
in rural areas (Council of Canadian Academies 2009). Other
sources suggest the figure is closer to 30% (Kohut et al. 2014).
The reliance exceeds 90% in Yukon and reaches 100% in
Prince Edward Island. More detailed information on water use
by source, sector and region is provided by Agrawal et al.
(2022).
In Canada, groundwater is typically closely linked to stream
flow, bodies of water and aquatic ecosystem health. During
low-flow seasons, groundwater contributes most of stream
flow (known as ‘base flow’). Globally, groundwater contributes
more to agricultural irrigation than surface water when consid-
ering the contribution of groundwater to surface water flows
(Wood and Cherry 2021).
Despite the importance of groundwater, it remains a large-
ly overlooked component of the water cycle, partly because it
exists out of sight, making it hard to quantify and understand
(e.g. Nowlan 2005; United Nations 2022), and partly because it
is complex to manage, as it is not necessarily confined by
watershed boundaries, political jurisdictions or divisions of
responsibility. 
Canada is renowned for its abundant supplies of freshwa-
ter; nevertheless, the country’s federal governance structure
and legislative assignments of water responsibility create a
complex setting for water action. Canada’s challenges around
water management are far from unique (e.g. Megdal et al. 2015;
Dudley Ward 2024; Madani 2026). The United States, Euro-
pean Union and other federations face similar difficulties man-
aging jurisdictional responsibilities for water resources (e.g.
Gerlak 2005; Boscheck 2006; Petersen-Perlman et al. 2018). 
Over the years, many observers have asserted the need for
more effective water governance and management in Canada.
Several have specifically noted the federal government’s poten-
tial to harmonize legislation and reduce fragmentation (Bakker
2007; Hill et al. 2008). As a step toward practical change, in
2019 the federal government initiated action to create the
Canada Water Agency. 
A panel at the 2025 joint meeting of the Geological Asso-
ciation of Canada, Mineralogical Association of Canada, and
International Association of Hydrogeologists – Canadian
National Chapter (GAC-MAC-IAH-CNC) in Ottawa reflected
on this context to discuss public groundwater science and pol-
icy in Canada, focusing on challenges of jurisdiction, funding
and capacity.
This article provides highlights from the last 55 years of
Canadian federal freshwater policy, includes a brief chronolo-
gy of the development of the Canada Water Agency, summa-
rizes key points made during the panel session, and identifies
persistent issues and concerns that affect groundwater gover-
nance in Canada, drawing on both the panel session and the
broader policy record. It goes on to propose four specific ways
to substantively address those issues and concerns, noting
where all the above align with the recommendations of the
May 2026 report from the Standing Committee on Environ-
ment and Sustainable Development, Sustaining Canada’s Fresh-
water for Today and Tomorrow (House of Commons of Canada
2026).
A more detailed report on the panel proceedings, including
full bibliographic information and panelist presentations, will
be made available as a Geological Survey of Canada publica-
tion (Russell et al. in prep).
WATER IN CANADA
General Information
Canada is fortunate to have a comparative abundance of water,
including 20% of the world’s total freshwater reserve and 7%
of the annual global renewable water supply (Environment
and Climate Change Canada 2020). Groundwater is an impor-
tant component of that abundance and is often indivisible
from surface water (Freeze and Cherry 1979; Winter et al.
1998; Hinton 2014), contributing up to two-thirds of the
annual flow of many Canadian rivers (Sharpe et al. 2014).
Almost all of Canada’s (and the world’s) unfrozen freshwater
is groundwater. 
252 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
Groundwater maintains minimum summer and winter
flows (Paznekas and Hayashi 2016) that support aquatic
ecosystem functions and broader watershed dynamics (e.g.
Hinton 2014; Linnansaari et al. 2023). This ecological role
stems from the continuous contribution of groundwater to
surface streams in the form of discharge, and from ground-
water’s relatively constant temperature throughout the year,
which mirrors the mean annual air temperature.
The subsurface connectivity of groundwater through pores
and fractures combined with its slow velocity also means it can
transport contaminants to discharge points such as rivers and
lakes years after initial release, potentially for extended periods
of time and over large areas. Conversely, surface water may
contribute to groundwater quantity and quality by recharging
aquifers in some regions (Fig. 2). Contaminated groundwater
can have serious negative impacts on the health of humans,
animals and associated ecosystems either directly by affecting
the quality of water supply wells or indirectly by degrading sur-
face water quality (e.g. Van Stempvoort et al. 2022; Storb et al.
2023; Hodgins et al. 2025). 
Throughout much of the world, population growth, agri-
cultural demand and industrial water use are stressing water
systems and threatening water supplies (Madani 2026). Cana-
da, despite its ‘water wealth’, is experiencing the consequences
of climate change through cyclical droughts (e.g. Cook et al.
2007) and some of the fastest rising average temperatures in
the world. Canada’s rate of temperature increase above pre-
industrial values is roughly twice the global average (e.g. Zhang
et  al.  2019;  https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/services/environmental-indicators/temperature-
change.html).
The socio-economic importance of groundwater, its eco-
logical significance and intensifying water stress make ground-
water management critically important (e.g. Council of Cana-
dian Academies 2009; Trainer et al. 2010). Yet today, Canada
has no comprehensive national system for groundwater over-
sight or monitoring (Ryan et al. 2026).
Freshwater Policy in Canada 
Canada’s provincial and territorial governments have primary
jurisdiction over natural resources, including most water man-
agement and protection within their boundaries (e.g. Bakker
and Cook 2011). This complicates the federal role in water
governance and policy. The federal government has responsi-
bilities related to protected areas, fish and fish habitat protec-
tion, species at risk and aquatic invasive species ( Canada Water
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 253
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
Figure 1. Water cycle highlighting groundwater–surface water components, from Hinton (2014).
Act 1985; Coté 2004). It is also responsible for navigation and
shipping and waters on federal lands, and shares responsibili-
ties with the provinces and territories for monitoring surface
water, monitoring and preventing pollution, and managing
inland fisheries. It is also involved in decisions when a body of
water spans or flows through more than one jurisdiction,
whether domestically or internationally.
The Canada Water Actof 1970 (hereafter, “the act”) is often
seen as a centrepiece of federal water legislation, although
practically it is part of a tapestry of various related laws and
has been under strain since its inception (e.g. Pearse et al. 1985;
Hania 2024). The overarching objective of the act is to provide
for the management of water resources, including research,
planning, and implementation of programs for conservation,
development and utilization. The act has four distinct parts:
Part 1: Comprehensive Water Resource Management 
Part 2: Water Quality Management
Part 3: Regulating Nutrients 
Part 4: General Administration of the Act (covering inspec-
tors and analysts, advisory committees, offences and
punishments, parliamentary reporting requirements
and more).
Part 2 has never been used. Part 3 was repealed in 1985 and is
now part of the  Canadian Environmental Protection Act , 1999
(Environment and Climate Change Canada 2025). 
The diversity of interests, roles and participants in water
issues at the federal level is evident in the fact that more than
20 federal departments and agencies have freshwater-related
responsibilities, further complicating the legislative context
(Canada Water Agency 2025a). Well over a dozen federal acts
have freshwater implications, including the Canada Water Act,
the Fisheries Act, the Canadian Environmental Protection Act and
254 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
Figure 2. Illustration of groundwater flow and geological units forming aquifers. (From Rivera 2014).
the Canadian Navigable Waters Act . Provinces and territories
have their own freshwater laws and associated bodies, ranging
in function from primary legislation to source protection
frameworks and strategic policies (e.g. Hill et al. 2008).
The first major inquiry into federal water policy under the
Canada Water Act was initiated in the 1980s when the Minister
of the Environment appointed an advisory committee that
became the Inquiry on Federal Water Policy. A concluding report
with recommendations was authored by Pearse et al. (1985).
The subsequent Federal Freshwater Policy (Environment
Canada 1987) set out federal policy objectives for water along
with a plan for assessments. Two assessments were completed
(1990, 1994), only one of which is readily accessible (Interde-
partmental Committee on Water 1990). Explicit recommenda-
tions were made related to groundwater issues including data
management, monitoring, quality protection guidelines and
integrated management. Specifically, the 1990 review recom-
mended: 
“...consultation with other departments, [and] co-ordinated strate-
gies for the sustainable development of ground-water resources and
surface resources dependent on ground water.”
Further reviews of the Federal Freshwater Policy were never
completed, and the Interdepartmental Committee on Water
became inactive around 1995 (Pearse and Quinn 1996). Some
of this decline in reporting and interdepartmental action may
be attributable to the 1994–1996 federal government Program
Review, which resulted in significant staff and funding cuts
(e.g. Tellier 2022).
Groundwater and the Canada Water Act
Environment and Climate Change Canada is the lead depart-
ment for the Canada Water Act and produces an annual Canada
Water Act report. (The department was formerly named Envi-
ronment Canada and is indicated as such where appropriate
throughout this article.) Coverage of groundwater varies con-
siderably across the 55 years of those reports, possibly reflect-
ing broader governmental priorities and focus as well as the
impact of funding pressures. Historical cycles of support and
funding for activities under the Canada Water Act were docu-
mented in the mid-1990s by Booth and Quinn (1995); by the
time of their review, which fell on the 25 th anniversary of the
act, dedicated funding had diminished to a fraction of the orig-
inal allocation.
A review of Canada Water Act annual reports (e.g. Environ-
ment Canada 1986; Environment and Climate Change Canada
2025) shows that groundwater work has typically focused on
ecological function, anthropogenic contaminants and ground-
water–surface water interactions, although a broader range of
topics such as geothermal energy and groundwater supply
have been considered at times. The reports tend to focus on
Environment Canada / Environment and Climate Change
Canada groundwater projects rather than on broader federal
activities that align with and support Part 1 of the act, such as
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s Drought Monitor or the
groundwater-related work of the Geological Survey of Canada
and the Canada Centre for Remote Sensing. Collaborative ini-
tiatives between Environment and Climate Change Canada
and Natural Resources Canada are not discussed, nor are 30
years of pre-2023 groundwater work at Natural Resources
Canada, despite joint publications (e.g. Rivera et al. 2003) and
multiple consecutive interdepartmental memoranda of under-
standing. 
Natural Resources Canada’s freshwater science mandate is
set out in the Department of Natural Resources Act (1994) and the
Resources and Technical Surveys Act (1985). The Geological Survey
of Canada, which is part of Natural Resources Canada, is
involved specifically with subsurface natural resources and as
such is the centre of expertise for groundwater mapping and
characterization, similar to geological survey organizations in
other G7 countries. 
As noted in the 2026 report from the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Devel-
opment (House of Commons of Canada 2026), Environment
and Climate Change Canada’s groundwater focus generally
relates to water quality whereas Natural Resources Canada’s
focus relates to groundwater quantity. However, these two
aspects are closely interconnected, as geochemistry helps to
provide a better understanding of groundwater flow, and water
supply issues rely not only on quantity but also quality.
Coordination between Environment and Climate Change
Canada and Natural Resources Canada seems to have been
challenging. Despite a call to action by the Interdepartmental
Committee on Water in 1990, 30 years of subsequent Canada
Water Actannual reports show limited evidence of coordinated
interdepartmental strategies between the two federal depart-
ments. This lack of coordination was further highlighted in a
report from a panel chaired by Dr. John Cherry (Morgan
1993). That said, groundwater research has been conducted
collaboratively by individual scientists from both organiza-
tions.
Growing Calls for Action
Federal freshwater research and policy in Canada have histori-
cally tended to focus on the most accessible, easiest-to-study
components of the water cycle such as atmospheric water and
surface water. Other parts of the water cycle have received less
attention. This is at least partly because the Canada Water Act
treats the water cycle holistically, without distinguishing
between groundwater, surface water or other components
such as precipitation, snow cover, glaciers or soil moisture. 
The result has been a systemic imbalance in funding alloca-
tions, reporting attention, science studies and infrastructure
development. For example, there are nearly 3,000 freshwater
stream flow monitoring stations in Canada’s collaborative fed-
eral/provincial National Hydrometric Network (NHN) but
only nine groundwater sites (Environment and Climate
Change Canada 2025). Currently, government groundwater
monitoring programs are conducted at the provincial, territo-
rial or municipal levels, resulting in significant variations in
monitoring station density, data types, technologies and prac-
tices for reporting results. This makes it challenging to assess
groundwater quantity and quality changes at the federal level.
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 255
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
New issues have emerged since the last update to the Cana-
da Water Actin 1985 and are not reflected in it, particularly with
respect to First Nations water governance rights (Marshall et
al. 2018; Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources
2024). Academics (de Loë 2008) and non-governmental organ-
izations (e.g. Nowlan 2005; Morris et al. 2007) have published
commentaries on various aspects of federal water governance
since at least the early 2000s, raising concerns about ground-
water pollution, water quantity, climate impacts, First Nations
water challenges and other factors. 
To address the growing need for coherent, coordinated
freshwater management, the Government of Canada commit-
ted in 2019 to establish a Canada Water Agency, issuing
instructions through a Ministerial Mandate letter to Environ-
ment and Climate Change Canada (Office of the Prime Min-
ister 2019).
In March 2021, the House of Commons Standing Com-
mittee on Environment and Sustainable Development (ENVI)
initiated a study of federal policies and legislation relating to
freshwater (House of Commons of Canada 2021). Across 22
sessions in a process that extended into 2024, government rep-
resentatives, academics, private sector organizations and non-
governmental organizations made 179 presentations and sub-
mitted 112 briefs (House of Commons of Canada 2021,
2024). Of those briefs, 42 reference groundwater, including,
most notably, the submission from International Association
of Hydrogeologists Canada (IAH Canada 2024), which recom-
mended inclusive terminology, a national monitoring network
and reporting as well as educational initiatives to raise aware-
ness and promote a better understanding of groundwater. 
Following a hiatus due to the 2025 federal election, the final
report on the committee’s hearings was published in May 2026
(House of Commons of Canada 2026). It recognizes the role
of groundwater in the Canadian waterscape and includes a
dedicated section on the topic. It also provides three recom-
mendations regarding groundwater (recommendations 17, 18
and 19), namely to:
! dedicate sufficient attention and resources to groundwa-
ter’s role in water security and climate adaptation.
! recognize the strategic value of groundwater and work
with other levels of government and scientists to protect
it from depletion and pollution.
! ensure groundwater is included explicitly in a modernized
Canada Water Act.
An additional recommendation (recommendation 55) refer-
ences groundwater in the context of human health and data
collection but is less pertinent to the present article.
EMERGENCE OF THE CANADA WATER AGENCY
The federal government’s announced intention to develop a
Canada Water Agency in 2019 was followed by an extensive
consultative process that engaged more than 2,700 Canadians.
The findings of those consultations were published in a What
We Heard report, which made explicit reference to groundwa-
ter, including: a) the observation that “improved understanding and
protection of groundwater is important to Canadians. ..”; b) acknowl-
edgement of the importance of groundwater to agriculture;
and c) recognition of the need for more hydrologic monitor-
ing, including of groundwater (Environment and Climate
Change Canada 2021). All provinces and territories participat-
ed, along with representatives from non-governmental organi-
zations (NGOs), First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities.
The Canada Water Agency became a standalone entity offi-
cially in October 2024, with a mandate to improve freshwater
management in Canada by providing leadership and effective
collaboration federally, and by improving coordination and
collaboration with provinces, territories, and Indigenous peo-
ples to proactively address national and regional transboundary
freshwater challenges and opportunities. 
Table 1 summarizes key milestones in the development of
the Canada Water Agency from the issuance of the original
Ministerial Mandate letter to the enactment of the Canada
Water Agency Act (2024) and ongoing freshwater strategy work.
Clear from this sequence of events is the agency’s foundational
commitment to engagement and consultation. 
THE 2025 GROUNDWATER PANEL
Organization and Design
In discussions with the Geological Survey of Canada, the
Canada Water Agency suggested holding a panel on ground-
water issues at the joint GAC-MAC-IAH-CNC meeting in
spring 2025. This was seen as an opportunity to further high-
light the importance of groundwater, build consensus among
key players and acknowledge some of the challenges associat-
ed with groundwater monitoring, reporting and education,
many of which have roots in Canada’s complex freshwater
policy environment. 
The panel discussion was part of a day-long series of tech-
nical sessions on groundwater that also included presentations
on groundwater monitoring, open access groundwater data,
demographic and professional trends in hydrogeology, provin-
cial groundwater geoscience, case studies from the provincial
Oak Ridges Moraine Groundwater Program and groundwater
studies at the Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources
Canada (Bingham-Koslowski 2025). 
The panel was moderated by Cynthia McClain, a University
of Calgary hydrogeology adjunct professor and IAH Alberta
Director. Panellists included Gemma Boag (Director General,
Canada Water Agency), Angela Coleman (General Manager,
Conservation Ontario), Brendan Mulligan (Senior Scientist,
Government of Yukon), Alfonso Rivera (Chair, IAH Trans-
boundary Aquifers Commission), and Sonia Talwar (Director
General, Geological Survey of Canada). 
The two-hour session included a brief round of introduc-
tions, responses to prepared questions, an open Q&A with
members of the audience, and a short wrap-up provided by
IAH member and University of Calgary hydrogeology profes-
sor Cathy Ryan. The prepared questions for the panel were
organized in four thematic segments (Table 2). The remainder
of this section summarizes key points of discussion related to
each principal theme.
256 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
Panel members agreed that bringing groundwater into the
freshwater conversation is important and must include not
only specialists but also policymakers, industry decision mak-
ers and members of the public. That kind of engagement
requires building up broad ‘water literacy’: widespread under-
standing of freshwater and the specific role groundwater plays
in human health, ecosystem health and many sectors of the
economy.
First theme: Overcoming political and policy barriers to
groundwater management
Different groups of interest holders tend to have unique con-
cerns and information needs about groundwater. Given this,
engagements need to be tailored to their interests—for exam-
ple, focusing on questions about water supplies, water quality
and water resource management when working with local offi-
cials and community groups that tend to be concerned with
practical community outcomes. Emphasizing the connections
between scientific research and such pragmatic objectives is
likely to be highly valuable and effective in such situations.
The National Dialogue on Groundwater was identified as
an effective coordination mechanism for public servants work-
ing in groundwater. Created and led by the Geological Survey
of Canada over the past 10 years, its goal is to improve com-
munication among the federal, provincial and territorial gov-
ernments. Panellists indicated the National Dialogue on
Groundwater is Canada’s only current national-scale ground-
water coordination effort, although the Canada Water Agency
is working to strengthen federal coordination and collabora-
tion through mechanisms such as the Federal Freshwater
Committee (which involves 20-plus federal departments and
agencies with freshwater-related responsibilities) and the Fed-
eral Freshwater Hub (Canada Water Agency 2025a). The Com-
mittee brings together senior management; whereas the Hub
embeds staff from other federal departments or agencies with
water-related responsibilities into the Canada Water Agency.
The panellists offered some thoughts on what a coordinating
body or structure should ideally be able to do, observing that
the National Dialogue on Groundwater is limited to facilitating
information-sharing among the provinces, territories and fed-
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 257
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
Table 1. Progression of the development of the Canada Water Agency and associated publications since 2019. 
Year Event
2019 Ministerial Mandate Letter directs the Minister of Environment and Climate Change Canada to create the Canada Water
Agency (Office of the Prime Minister 2019)
2020 PlaceSpeak public engagement platform launched to host online consultations 
2020 Government of Canada launches consultations on new Canada Water Agency 
2020 Regional virtual consultation sessions held
2020 Toward the Creation of a Canada Water Agency discussion paper (Environment and Climate Change Canada 2020)
2021 Formal public and stakeholder comment period closed
2021–2023 Indigenous engagement process held with First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities
2021 Toward the Creation of a Canada Water Agency Stakeholder and public engagement – What we heard (Environment and
Climate Change Canada 2021)
2021 Throne Speech and Budget reaffirm the federal government’s commitment to create the Canada Water Agency
2023 Canada Water Agency established as a branch within Environment and Climate Change Canada
2023 Canada Water Agency Act tabled as part of Bill C-59
2024 Synthesis of Freshwater Science in Canada (Environment and Climate Change Canada 2024)
2024 National Freshwater Data Strategy workshop held at the Canada Centre for Inland Waters in Burlington, Ontario
2024 Bill C-59 receives Royal Assent on June 20
2024 Canada Water Agency launched as a standalone entity
2024–2025 About the Canada Water Act Review —  the Canada Water Act (1985) renewal process — begins with pre-engagement of
provinces, territories and Indigenous partners
2025 National Freshwater Data Strategy discussion paper based on the 2024 workshop (Canada Water Agency 2025c)
2026 National Freshwater Science Agenda (Environment and Climate Change Canada 2026)
2026 A Force of Nature: Canada’s Strategy to Protect Nature announcing the Canada Water Agency will collaborate to develop Canada’s
first National Water Security Strategy
eral government and does not undertake or coordinate joint
projects or initiatives. 
In considering alternative models, panellists discussed the
National Administrators Table of the National Hydrometric
Program and the Ontario Source Water Protection Frame-
work. Panel members saw the National Administrators Table’s
defined mandate, budget and bilateral agreements (pertaining
to hydrometrics) as key strengths. Ideally, groundwater could
be folded into the National Administrators Table to improve
coordination at the national level. The Ontario Source Water
Protection Framework was also considered notable for its
multi-stakeholder, multidisciplinary nature. Local committees
of policy and technical experts work together to implement
solutions, providing a structure that allows for dialogue and
information exchanges that otherwise might not occur. In such
a model, success hinges on ensuring that committee work is
meaningful and has real influence on implementation, and that
technical outputs are subject to peer review. Supporting this
kind of model requires ‘infrastructure’ in the sense of knowl-
edge, resources, relationships and broad representation of sec-
tors and disciplines.
On the question of communication, panellists acknowl-
edged challenges resulting from the complexities of many
water-related issues as well as the complicated policy and gov-
ernance environment. Individual institutions have different
norms and expectations around communication and different
bodies of knowledge to draw on. Broad, formal engagement
efforts are essential, and communication among parties must
also be formalized, which will support not only knowledge
sharing but also, ultimately, the implementation and manage-
ment of groundwater initiatives.
Second theme: Funding and capacity challenges in
groundwater
Panellists generally felt that groundwater remains a ‘blind spot’
for many funders, noting its exclusion from many calls for pro-
posals on freshwater. Resources are often directed to surface
water research because any changes in surface water or human
health impacts related to it are visible and therefore attract
political and public interest. If groundwater were more widely
recognized as a significant source of freshwater and an impor-
tant contributor to surface water—making it integral to overall
water security and economic growth—groundwater science
would draw greater institutional support and, as a result,
increased funding. Issues such as conjunctive water and land
use management and transboundary waters offer strong ‘busi-
ness cases’ of the sort that could conceivably capture greater
political will.
258 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
Table 2. Themes and questions addressed by the panel. Questions have been paraphrased with complete questions available in
Russell et al. (in preparation).
First theme: Overcoming political and policy barriers to groundwater management
Question 1. What steps are needed to elevate the importance of groundwater among government decision makers to support
policy action and sustainable water management?
Question 2. What coordination mechanisms already exist? What gaps or barriers remain to bridging different water disciplines
and organizational silos to support better coordination of groundwater policy, monitoring, characterization and
management across Canada?
Question 3. Is there good communication on groundwater between the three orders of government (federal, provincial/territo-
rial and municipal)? What steps can be taken to remove barriers and improve communication? 
Second theme: Funding and capacity challenges in groundwater
Question 1. Why is it difficult to obtain long-term funding for groundwater monitoring, science and management, and what
changes are needed to improve funding stability? What specific mechanisms (e.g. federal funding streams, provincial
initiatives, public-private partnerships) could help secure stable, long-term funding for groundwater monitoring, sci-
ence, and management in Canada?
Question 2. Where is groundwater capacity needed (e.g. leadership, policy, science, monitoring), and how can this be achieved?
Third theme: Data, science and monitoring needs
Question 1. Is there a need for a national groundwater monitoring network in Canada, and what are recommended approaches? 
Are there other key challenges (e.g. equity, jurisdiction, policy, etc.) to a national-scale monitoring approach?
Fourth theme: Public awareness and future directions
Question 1. How can we increase public awareness of groundwater and its critical role in sustaining surface water, droughts, per-
mafrost, drinking water resources and ensuring long-term water security, including for transboundary aquifers? 
Question 2. Please tell a short, impactful story about a groundwater issue.
One area of activity on which the panellists agreed was the
need for stable, long-term funding for groundwater monitor-
ing. Monitoring enables scientists and decision makers to
understand, protect and sustainably manage freshwater
resources. Sustainable, long-term monitoring requires ongoing
dialogue among federal and provincial/territorial governments
so that federal decision makers can better understand regional
and local needs and provincial/territorial authorities can be
more aware of when funding is available. Current federal fund-
ing models for groundwater science need to change, as the
existing grant structure supports single, one-off projects, not
long-term, nationwide initiatives such as the operation of
monitoring networks.
To the question of where capacity is needed, the panel
identified at least two areas: 1) monitoring and management of
water resources that are not subject to regulations (e.g. ecolog-
ical flows); and 2) increased capacity at the leadership level of
government. The implication of the second point is that high-
er level managers should have a better understanding of
groundwater to make informed decisions. Canada is strong in
water science but less so in groundwater policy and manage-
ment. Groundwater scientists need to be integrated into fresh-
water decision-making processes from end to end to ensure
that groundwater is properly considered.
Third theme: Data, science and monitoring needs
Given the funding-related discussion about monitoring out-
lined above, panel members were unified in the view that
Canada needs a national groundwater monitoring network to
address changing systems. The National Hydrometric Service
was considered to be a good example of what is possible: its
network monitors surface water, primarily water quantity. Due
to jurisdictional responsibilities and funding limitations,
groundwater likely requires a ‘network of networks’ rather
than a single national network. The existing Groundwater
Information Network (https://gin.geosciences.ca/service/
api_ngwds:gin2/en/gin.html) could provide the foundation
for this, though work remains to be done to harmonize and
standardize data collection, analysis and reporting. It may be
ideal to integrate groundwater monitoring into the National
Administrators Table and National Hydrometric Program.
Although freshwater management is a provincial/territorial
responsibility, the panel made the distinction that monitoring
is not necessarily a management function, but rather a scientif-
ic necessity to support management. The panel suggested that
the federal government should see a role for itself in ground-
water monitoring as an activity to be co-led with provincial and
territorial partners (as it does for surface water).
Fourth theme: Public awareness and future directions
Groundwater is challenging for many people to think about or
conceptualize because they do not experience it directly. Even
those who depend on it (for example, groundwater wells for
household use) tend not to have a complete understanding of
it. Informing people about the economic, social and environ-
mental value of freshwater, including groundwater, is critical
for informed and responsible decision-making. The Canada
Water Agency has specifically made this kind of education part
of its workstreams.
At the time of the panel discussion, the 25th anniversary of
the Walkerton tragedy in Ontario was approaching (O’Connor
2002). That high-profile case of groundwater contamination
led to seven deaths and more than 2 000 illnesses due to the
presence of groundwater-sourced E. coli bacteria in the town’s
drinking water system. Walkerton was mentioned as a story
that remains a powerful testament to the importance of good
groundwater science and management. Another example
raised was the 2024 Eagle Gold Mine disaster in Yukon. A
landslide of crushed rock treated with processing solutions
caused cyanide to leach into the environment, and the subse-
quent contamination of water resources occurred, as it often
does, through groundwater. 
Audience Q&A
Following the prepared questions, panellists took questions
from the audience. These ranged from challenging assump-
tions put forward by the panel that groundwater is overlooked,
for example, or that it requires specific advocacy, to problems
of cooperation, data collection (monitoring) and data sharing.
The panellists reiterated that Canada’s complex policy and gov-
ernance environment makes it necessary to be intentional
about including groundwater in freshwater conversations.
Economic arguments were recognized as potentially powerful
and persuasive in helping drive home the importance of
groundwater and freshwater generally. 
The panel also noted that groundwater science has been
historically underfunded by the federal government compared
to surface water science: calling it out as an area of concern
could help correct the imbalance. Finally, because groundwater
is multi-jurisdictional and a multi-departmental responsibility,
keeping it in the spotlight helps foster cross-government col-
laboration, which eliminates redundancies and makes depart-
ments more efficient.
The establishment of the Canada Water Agency was given
as an example of real commitment to closing gaps in leader-
ship and cooperation. In terms of data collection, the panel
noted that policy is not the only tool required: technology and
innovation are vitally important as well, for gathering more and
better information and converting it into knowledge that can
inform policy. Data sharing and data standards were agreed to
be crucial, as their lack can pose very real barriers to effective
resource management. Finally, it was repeated that a critical
next step will be to design a national groundwater monitoring
program or network of networks that is respectful of and
rooted in regional needs and priorities.
DISCUSSION
The following discussion draws on arguments put forward by
the panellists, contextualized by the 55-year history of federal
freshwater policy. It focuses on five specific areas: 1) gover-
nance barriers, 2) funding, 3) capacity, 4) monitoring and 5)
communication. Many of the issues and concerns raised can
be traced back to the 1980s and documentation by the Inquiry
on Federal Water Policy (Pearse et al. 1985) and numerous sub-
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 259
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
sequent publications. Despite their persistence, these issues
and concerns are not static, shifting with changes in govern-
ments, evolving departmental priorities and the outcomes of
policy reviews. The present discussion considers what has and
what has not changed and identifies where targeted action is
already occurring and could have the greatest effect.
Governance Barriers 
Governance challenges related to water resources are rooted in
the constitutional assignment of natural resources to the
provinces and federal government and the fact that while the
Canada Water Act emphasizes federal–provincial consultation
and collaboration, it does not distinguish between surface
water and groundwater. Overcoming these challenges will only
be achieved through shared goals, collaboration and financial
necessity. Generally, action on groundwater will require multi-
stakeholder (e.g. Rivera et al. 2003; Schaefer and Bielak 2006)
and multidisciplinary efforts (e.g. Rivera 2014). This challenge
was recognized in the early 2000s by the Canadian Council of
Ministers of the Environment which, in collaboration with
National Water Research Institute, organized a series of water
science–policy workshops (Schaefer and Bielak 2006). 
The Senate Committee report, Water in the West: Under Pres-
sure (Senate of Canada 2005), provides a powerful example of
what political recognition of an issue and a sense of imperative
can achieve. The report propelled groundwater progress on
Canada’s 30 key aquifers (Rivera 2014) for a 10-year period. By
that example, progress can be made when politics, funding, sci-
ence capacity and strong federal–provincial collaboration all
coexist. Unfortunately, the achievements related to that work
are not recorded in the Canada Water Act annual reports, even
though efforts were aligned with the act and mirrored munici-
pal water supply work completed previously by Environment
Canada (1986). Momentum and funding for this national
aquifer mapping effort ultimately waned, leaving much of
Canada with unmapped groundwater bodies. 
Up to 2024, the Canada Water Agency presented its focus
as being on surface water while acknowledging groundwater is
also within its scope (Goffin and Sullivan 2024). Since then,
the agency has recognized the need for more dedicated atten-
tion to groundwater, and there are broader signs of groundwa-
ter gaining recognition, including in documents on freshwater
science synthesis and the science agenda (Environment and
Climate Change Canada 2024, 2026). The Canada Water
Agency’s increased emphasis on groundwater along with these
wider acknowledgements demonstrates that formal, structural
barriers can be overcome and that the culture of water science
can change. What is now required is appropriate action by sen-
ior managers at all levels of government to bring about
enhanced coordination and collaboration across the Govern-
ment of Canada and with the provinces and territories. Fur-
thermore, there needs to be involvement of groundwater
experts in policy and management decision-making processes. 
Funding
Funding for groundwater studies, and in fact for science in
general, is captive to societal and political attention (e.g. Naylor
et al. 2017). Significantly and unfortunately, the Naylor et al.
review of Canadian science excluded department-based gov-
ernment research. Nevertheless, the report recommended
increased collaboration between government and academic
researchers and between federal–provincial–territorial
researchers. It also highlighted the need for improved inter-
connected research within government to support policy. 
These recommendations touch on issues that have been
challenges for freshwater science since the inception of the
Canada Water Act in 1970 and have been commented on over
the life of the act (e.g. Interdepartmental Committee on Water
1990; Booth and Quinn 1995). Water resources support the
larger environmental, economic and social issues that are often
central to government policy; however, funding for proactive
rather than reactive freshwater science, and more specifically
groundwater science, is commonly overlooked. A now-classic
example of this reactive versus proactive imbalance is the
USA ’s Superfund program: created only after the 1970s discov-
ery of sites like Love Canal, it has since required enormous
investment in contaminant identification and remediation that
proactive monitoring could have averted at a fraction of the
cost. 
In the late 1980s, declining attention to freshwater was
attributed to the rise of the sustainable development perspec-
tive articulated in what is colloquially known as the ‘Brundt-
land Report’ (World Commission on Environment and Devel-
opment 1987) and, subsequently, to the development of the
Green Plan (see Government of Canada 1990; Booth and
Quinn 1995). With Program Review in the mid-1990s, federal
funding and capacity were both further diminished. For exam-
ple, the National Hydrometric System was compelled to
reduce its monitoring network by 30% (Environment Canada
2000). 
Booth and Quinn (1995) have mapped out decadal funding
variations and funding mechanisms during the first 25 years of
the Canada Water Act. In the early 2000s, groundwater
received minimal direct funding under the act even though the
Geological Survey of Canada had been funded (Senate of
Canada 2005) to work on 30 key aquifers, develop the Ground-
water Information Network, and provide national synthesis
(Rivera 2014; Natural Resources Canada 2019). This funding
allocation had a period of 10 years, despite the monumental
and iterative tasks required, and its implementation was made
more complicated by shifting issues and growing population
pressures. 
These funding constraints and reductions over the years
seem to have failed to recognize why water resource manage-
ment—the principal pillar of the Canada Water Act—matters.
Water is bound up inextricably with economic development,
environmental protection and health. Testament to this, the
first comprehensive review of groundwater in Canada was
published as a Geological Survey of Canada Economic Geol-
ogy report (Brown 1967). Additionally, in a report for the
Prospector and Developers Association of Canada, Duke
(2010) stated: “… water resources may well become the most prominent
resource issue of the 21st century.” As noted previously, the pivotal
role of freshwater in supporting all aspects of Canadian soci-
260 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
ety seems poorly appreciated in federal government depart-
ments. General funding as provided under the Freshwater
Action Plan (Environment and Climate Change Canada 2025)
is important; however, for the most part such funding is
unavailable to federal government science departments. Con-
sequently, while the government is supporting freshwater
activity in major water basins, it is failing to provide commen-
surate support for government science infrastructure, staffing
and science research. Both Environment and Climate Change
Canada and Natural Resources Canada have been faced with
declining core funding, resulting in staff attrition, challenges in
maintaining research infrastructure and an inability to sustain
thematic research initiatives.
The most substantial freshwater funding in decades was
provided to the Canada Water Agency (2025b) in the 2023 fed-
eral budget for the Freshwater Action Plan (Department of
Finance 2023). That plan, which is focused on managing,
restoring and protecting freshwater in surface water basins,
gives groundwater minimal profile. There is an opportunity to
realign Canada’s freshwater ecosystem priorities with the
recently released Environment and Climate Change Canada
Freshwater Science Agenda (Environment and Climate
Change Canada 2026), which meaningfully includes groundwa-
ter science and research priorities, and to include nationally sig-
nificant groundwater bodies as well.
Groundwater science needs stable, long-term funding for
research and monitoring that supports the Canada Water Act .
There is a need to build momentum by raising awareness
among policymakers and the general public about groundwa-
ter—to develop expertise, fund science to characterize
resources and establish a national groundwater monitoring
network capable of providing long-term data, and to report on
status and trends in line with international goals (e.g. the UN
Sustainable Development Goals). 
Capacity
The issue of scientific capacity in government is more com-
plex than may first appear. Canada has recognized expertise in
groundwater science but lacks the resources and infrastructure
to engage in it comprehensively. While groundwater capacity
has been improving in some provinces and territories and in
certain municipalities, capacity in the federal government has
diminished to historic lows unparalleled since the end of the
Second World War. The decline in groundwater expertise at
Environment and Climate Change Canada and Natural
Resources Canada since the 1990s Program Review is provided
in the IAH Canada (2024) brief to the Standing Committee on
Environment and Sustainable Development. Loss of senior
groundwater science expertise is particularly critical, as even
capable researchers and investigators will struggle to make
progress without strong leadership driving action. The chal-
lenge of leadership loss has been illustrated by de Loë and Pat-
terson (2017), who found that water-focused science staff
have minimal impact when their efforts are held up against the
larger and more powerful socio-economic perspectives exteri-
or to the water community. 
The federal workforce adjustment exercise underway today
combined with emerging governmental priorities and budget-
ary constraints does not make the prospect of addressing the
capacity gap particularly promising. An analysis of data from
Statistics Canada and the Council of Chairs of Canadian Earth
Science Departments concluded the number of geoscientists
in the labour market declined by 11% between 2011 and 2021,
with university enrolment in geoscience programs declining in
many countries including Canada (Lebel et al. 2025).
This decline is part of a broader North American trend
and may be attributable to the perception of job instability in
the natural resources sector and to misconceptions that the
geosciences are limited to oil, gas and mining (Lebel et al.
2025). The lack of visibility of Earth sciences in high school
curricula may also be a factor, along with competition from
programs in environmental science, climate science and engi-
neering. All of these are linked, directly or indirectly, to a lack
of interest in and a lack of understanding of the Earth sci-
ences, which include groundwater,  implying a broad public
failure to recognize its importance. Also related to education,
water policy programs should incorporate more extensive
groundwater subject matter, and hydrogeology programs
could integrate water policy components to help create a
pipeline of ‘groundwater literate’ future leaders.
The takeaway is that building leaders’ knowledge and
awareness of groundwater and their ability to make water-
minded policy is as important as building raw science capacity.
This can be achieved by integrating scientists into policy-mak-
ing and other decision-making processes, with increased repre-
sentation of groundwater expertise in freshwater discussions.
Particularly when budgets are tight, it may be advisable for
government to engage with hydrogeology experts through
professional societies such as IAH Canada, including its Com-
mittee for Groundwater Advocacy, which conducts groundwa-
ter policy research. Successful development of groundwater
within freshwater public science funding and much-needed
groundwater science likely requires groundwater issues to be
linked explicitly to political, educational and economic priori-
ties, i.e. by reframing the perception of groundwater so that it
is seen as being integral to water security and economic
growth. 
Monitoring
Canada is the only G7 and circumpolar country without a
national monitoring program for groundwater (Ryan et al.
2026). This lack of infrastructure is problematic as it renders
Canada unable to monitor interprovincial (regional) ground-
water changes. It also constrains groundwater science and
handicaps federal reporting for international commitments. As
noted earlier in this article, Canada has a world-class national
surface water monitoring network of approximately 3 000 sta-
tions (Environment and Climate Change Canada 2025), yet
only nine groundwater sites in the National Hydrometric Net-
work. Groundwater monitoring is nearly completely imple-
mented on the provincial, watershed and local scale. For the
provinces and territories, water level monitoring networks are
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 261
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
maintained, documented and delivered online to various levels
of completeness for nine provinces and one territory. 
While noteworthy academic groundwater networks exist at
research stations and watersheds (e.g. Larocque and Thériault
2026), these are designed, implemented and maintained to
achieve specific research objectives, and not to record general
observations over time. Academic networks also commonly
have short funding cycles, whereas multidecadal funding is
needed to sustain and maintain a national groundwater moni-
toring network. 
The challenge of groundwater monitoring was raised by
the Interdepartmental Committee on Water over 30 years ago
(1990). The need for data collection under an open access
model was further raised by the National Round Table on the
Environment and the Economy (2012) through its National
Water Forum. There has been little subsequent progress, even
though there is no legislated or policy directive that the
National Hydrometric Program should be focused on surface
water monitoring (e.g. Environment and Climate Change
Canada 2023). The panel discussion highlighted that the
importance of monitoring goes beyond resource management,
and in fact comprises a form of critical infrastructure for
freshwater science, especially in the context of climate change.
A review of briefs submitted to the freshwater committee of
the House of Commons Standing Committee on Environ-
ment and Sustainable Development indicated concern regard-
ing groundwater monitoring and a need for national (federal)
involvement for groundwater quantity, quality, watershed and
surface water interaction issues. 
An interim solution has been to develop a data system that
supports a ‘network of networks’ approach by the Groundwa-
ter Information Network (e.g. Brodaric et al. 2016), which
delivers water well and monitoring well data from multiple
provinces using international standards. However, the
Groundwater Information Network approach does not touch
on the purposeful design of a national network or standards
for water quality, well placement, well design, measurement
devices, and more, that are found in the National Hydrometric
Service surface water system (Environment and Climate
Change Canada 2023) and US National Groundwater Moni-
toring Network (Subcommittee on Ground Water 2013).
Developing a true national network likely requires integra-
tion of groundwater representation at the National Adminis-
trator’s Table and the National Hydrometric Program, which
are currently attended by provincial and territorial representa-
tives of departments responsible for both surface water and
groundwater. It also requires establishing a funded mandate to
design and implement a network, a point highlighted in 1990
(Interdepartmental Committee on Water 1990).
Jurisdictional differences may be another challenge to over-
come. Panellists and audience participants acknowledged that
developing a national network could be complicated by con-
flicting perspectives, objectives and provincial and territorial
capacity. Nevertheless, all agreed there are strong grounds for
arguing in favour of a national monitoring approach, with well
documented results and cost benefits of monitoring the water
cycle overall and groundwater specifically (e.g. Kim and Kim
2019).
Communication
A relatively small proportion of Canadians understand what
groundwater is or appreciate its importance. Beyond bureau-
crats and politicians, the general public’s ‘groundwater literacy’
needs bolstering. Those who do recognize why and how
groundwater matters must raise awareness that freshwater
includes both groundwater and surface water. Communica-
tions need to reflect this fact. As technical jargon can be a bar-
rier when trying to reach non-specialist audiences, plain lan-
guage communication efforts will be important to any educa-
tional push.
The unspecific language of the Canada Water Act may be
adequate for individuals with deep knowledge of the integrat-
ed nature of the water cycle but likely does not register with
non-specialists. This is a major challenge for groundwater
gaining recognition and appropriate attention. As de Loë and
Patterson (2017) highlighted, it may be difficult to change the
behaviour of non-specialists if they feel their primary interests
and objectives might be compromised by doing so. For exam-
ple, failure to understand groundwater’s contribution to base-
flow and thermal refugia for spawning fish (or in delivering
contaminants to critical aquatic habitat regions) may not be
obvious to many who want to divert groundwater resources
for higher value economic returns. 
Increased communication, information and data sharing
will therefore be key to the success of any multidisciplinary
approach, and efforts are underway. The panel discussion itself
marked an important step in this direction, as did the earlier
publication of Canada’s Groundwater Resources (Rivera 2014),
highlighted by Harford (2015) as an invaluable compendium of
groundwater science aimed at a public audience. An excellent
Canadian not-for-profit academic example is The Groundwater
Project (Cherry 2020), while more public-oriented approaches
are offered by AquaAction (https://aquaaction.org) and the
Canadian Geographic Society (https://canadaoceanmap.ca).
Several provinces have launched annual groundwater geo-
science workshops to communicate government work to the
public and technical users. In collaboration with the Geological
Survey of Canada and other organizations, the Ontario Geo-
logical Survey has been running an annual workshop and pub-
lishing abstracts from its proceedings for the past decade (e.g.
Burt et al. 2026). An annual hybrid workshop was initiated in
2022 in British Columbia. The province is also publishing a
quarterly groundwater-focused newsletter (Government of
British Columbia 2026). 
Both IAH Canada and the Canadian Water Resources
Association host podcasts and local and regional workshops
for groundwater professionals. The “Réseau québécois sur les
eaux souterraines” (https://www.rqes.ca) makes groundwater
knowledge, research results, educational tools and publications
publicly accessible to support informed decision-making about
Québec’s aquifers. 
262 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
As more participants get involved and work together, and
as more data and knowledge are shared, efforts can be pooled
to build up better understanding of groundwater resources.
Any such communication and data-sharing must be formalized
and must also be encouraged and financially supported by gov-
ernments: it cannot be expected to happen on its own.
CONCLUSIONS
Bringing scientists, policymakers, and decision makers together
to advance practical aims remains a challenge given their dif-
ferent operational timeframes and knowledge and, in many
cases, cultures, values and ethics (Schaefer and Bielak 2006).
Yet it seems undeniable that researchers and policymakers
could benefit from an increased understanding of each other’s
disciplines, objectives and constraints. The 2025 groundwater
panel helped breach this divide by giving a predominantly sci-
ence-oriented audience the opportunity to hear from individu-
als representing policy and senior management perspectives.
The panel also stood out for its collective involvement of Nat-
ural Resources Canada, the Canada Water Agency and provin-
cial, watershed and international NGO representatives, poten-
tially signalling a new era in communication and collaboration
on groundwater. 
Four specific outcomes would help address many of the
concerns raised during the panel discussion: 
1. Explicit inclusion of groundwater in any renewed federal
freshwater policy framework. 
2. Stable, multi-year funding for groundwater science and
monitoring structured to build institutional capacity and
long-term datasets rather than fund discrete projects—
coordinated through the Canada Water Agency and
administered in partnership with the Geological Survey of
Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada,
provincial geoscience and environmental bodies, Indige-
nous communities and NGOs. 
3. Development of a national monitoring network co-led by
the Geological Survey of Canada and Environment and
Climate Change Canada, with provincial and territorial
partners and integrated into the existing National Hydro-
metric Program for surface water. 
4. Formalization of groundwater expertise within federal
freshwater decision-making processes, including represen-
tation at the National Administrators Table and explicit
groundwater workstreams within the Canada Water
Agency’s thematic priorities. 
In many ways, these panel outcomes parallel IAH Canada’s
recommendations to the Standing Committee on Environ-
ment and Sustainable Development and the findings of that
committee’s final report (House of Commons of Canada
2026). Specifically, the committee called on the Canada Water
Agency to dedicate attention and resources to the role of
groundwater in water security and climate adaptation, for
groundwater to be built into a renewed Canada Water Act, and
for freshwater monitoring that includes groundwater, empha-
sizing the need for analysis related to human health impacts
(House of Commons of Canada 2026).
The panel at the national meeting in 2025 of the Geologi-
cal Association of Canada – Mineralogical Association of
Canada meeting in Ottawa jointly coordinated with IAH Cana-
da demonstrated that the scientific community, federal and ter-
ritorial governments and conservation practitioners share a
common sense of direction. The challenge is to sustain that
shared sense and find the broader support to convert it into
policy, monitoring infrastructure and sustained investment.
Canada’s groundwater, and the surface water, ecosystems and
communities and economic sectors that depend on it, cannot
afford another 35-year interval between recognition and
action.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Assistance from IAH Canada volunteer Reginald Somera was highly valuable in
developing the panel and the report on its proceedings. Help of Tessa Di Iorio of
the IAH Canada conference organizing committee was much appreciated. Thanks
also to Melissa Bunn of the Geological Survey of Canada for providing an internal
content review, and to Dustin Garrick for comments on a draft. This is a contribu-
tion to the Canada1Water Phase 2 project of the Environmental Geoscience Pro-
gram, Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources Canada.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, N., Patrick, T., Davis, M., Ahiduzzaman, M., Kumar, A., 2022, Analysis of
Canada’s water use: tracing water flow from source to end use: Canadian
Water Resources Journal, v. 47, p. 19–39, https://doi.org/10.1080/
07011784.2021.1994884.
Bakker, K., 2007, Chapter 1: Introduction, in Bakker, K., ed., Eau Canada, The
Future of Canada’s Water: University British Columbia Press, Vancouver, BC,
p. 1–22.
Bakker, K., and Cook, C., 2011, Water governance in Canada: Innovation and frag-
mentation: International Journal of Water Resources Development, v. 27, p.
275–289, https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2011.564969.
Bingham-Koslowski, N., 2025, GAC–MAC–IAH-CNC 2025 Ottawa Meeting:
Abstracts, v. 48, p. 81–267, https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2025.52.223.
Booth, L., and Quinn, F., 1995, Twenty-five years of the Canada Water Act: Cana-
dian Water Resources Journal, v. 20, p. 65–90, https://doi.org/10.4296/
cwrj2002065.
Boscheck, R., 2006, The EU water framework directive: Meeting the global call for
regulatory guidance?: Intereconomics, v. 41, p. 268–271, https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10272-006-0196-1.
Brodaric, B., Booth, N., Boisvert, E., and Lucido, J., 2016, Groundwater data net-
work interoperability: Journal of Hydroinformatics, v. 18, p. 210–225,
https://doi.org/10.2166/hydro.2015.242.
Brown, I.C., 1967, Groundwater in Canada: Economic Geology Report 24, Geolog-
ical Survey of Canada, 243 p., https://doi.org/10.4095/102458.
Burt, A.K., Colgrove, L.M., Ford, D., Holysh, S., Kalmo, K.J.J., Rivard, C., and Stry-
natka, S.A., compilers, 2026, Ontario Groundwater Geoscience 2026 Open
House: Ontario Geological Survey, Open File Report 6423, 56 p.
Canada Water Act, 1985, Revised Statutes of Canada, c. C-11: https://laws-lois.jus-
tice.gc.ca/eng/acts/c-11/FullText.html.
Canada Water Agency Act, 2024, Statutes of Canada, c. 15, s. 209; Assented to 2024-
06-20: https://laws.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/C-11.001/.
Canada Water Agency, 2025a, Minister’s Transition Binder – March 2025, Introduc-
tion [Online]: Minister of Environment and Climate Change Canada,
https://www.canada.ca/en/canada-water-agency/corporate/transparency/
briefing-materials/transition-binder-minister-2025/section-1.html, accessed
2026-09-02.
Canada Water Agency, 2025b, Freshwater Action Plan Overview [Online]: Minister
of Environment and Climate Change Canada, https://www.canada.ca/en/
canada-water-agency/freshwater-action-plan.html, accessed 2026-05-01.
Canada Water Agency, 2025c, National Freshwater Data Strategy [Online]: Minister
of Environment and Climate Change Canada, 70 p., https://www.canada.ca/
en/canada-water-agency/data-collaboration/national-freshwater-data-strate-
gy/workshop-2024/workshop-2024-report.html.
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 263
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources, 2024 February 7, Indigenous
water rights in federal freshwater governance [Brief]: Submission to the Stand-
ing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development, House of
Commons of Canada, https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/Committee/
441/ENVI/Brief/BR12928218/br-external/CentreForIndigenousEnviron-
mentalResources-e.pdf.
Cherry, J., 2020, The groundwater project: Democratizing groundwater knowledge:
Groundwater, v. 58, p. 682–683, https://doi.org/10.1111/gwat.13029.
Cook, E.R., Seager, R., Cane, M.A., and Stahle, D.W ., 2007, North American
drought: Reconstructions, causes, and consequences: Earth-Science Reviews, v.
81, p. 93–134, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2006.12.002.
Coté, F., 2004, Freshwater Management in Canada: IV . Groundwater: Library of
Parliament, Publication No. PRB 04-48E, Ottawa, ON, 16 p., https://publica-
tions.gc.ca/collections/Collection-R/LoPBdP/PRB-e/PRB0554-e.pdf.
Council of Canadian Academies, 2009, The sustainable management of groundwa-
ter in Canada: Report of the Expert Panel on Groundwater prepared for the
Government of Canada, 255 p., https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/
2022/11/The-Sustainble-Management-of-Groundwater-in-Canada-Full-
Report-EN.pdf.
de Loë, R., 2008, Invited commentary: Canada needs a national water strategy: Cana-
dian Water Resources Journal, v. 33, p. 309–314, https://doi.org/10.4296/
cwrj3304309.
de Loë, R.C., and Patterson, J.J., 2017, Rethinking water governance: Moving beyond
water-centric perspectives in a connected and changing world: Natural
Resources Journal, v. 57, p. 75–100, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26202188.
Department of Finance, 2023, Budget 2023: Government of Canada, 255 p.,
https://www.budget.canada.ca/2023/report-rapport/chap4-en.html#a13. 
Department of Natural Resources Act, 1994, Statutes of Canada, c. 41:
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/N-20.8/.
Dudley Ward, N., 2024, The groundwater crisis: The need for new data to inform
public policy: Harvard Data Science Review, v. 6, https://doi.org/
10.1162/99608f92.67bb0dd2.
Duke, J.M., 2010, Government geoscience to support mineral exploration: public
policy rationale and impact: Prospectors and Developers Association of Cana-
da, Toronto, ON, https://ostrnrcan-dostrncan.canada.ca/handle/1845/
164485.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2020, Toward the creation of a Canada
Water Agency: Discussion paper: Minister of Environment and Climate
Change, 69 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2022/eccc/
En4-462-2020-eng.pdf.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2021, Toward the creation of a Canada
Water Agency: Stakeholder and public engagement – What we heard: Minister
of Environment and Climate Change, 37 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collec-
tions/collection_2021/eccc/En4-433-2021-eng.pdf.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2023, Evaluation of the National Hydro-
logical Services final report: Report by the Evaluation Division of the Audit
and Evaluation Branch, 30 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collec-
tion_2023/eccc/En4-542-2023-eng.pdf.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2024, Synthesis of freshwater science in
Canada: Government of Canada, 46 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collec-
tions/collection_2024/eccc/En84-359-2023-eng.pdf.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2025, Canada Water Act annual report
to Parliament 2023 to 2024: Minister of Environment and Climate Change, 69
p., https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/water-
overview/publications/canada-water-act-2023-2024.html.
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2026, National Freshwater Science
Agenda: A report on national freshwater science priorities: Minister of the
Environment, Climate Change and Nature, 72 p., https://www.canada.ca/con-
tent/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/water/freshwater/2026_03_18_FINAL_EN
GLISH_NFSA%20(NO%20ISBN).pdf.
Environment Canada,1986, Canada Water Act annual report 1985-86: Minister of
the Environment, 54 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_
2024/eccc/En1-20-1986-eng.pdf.
Environment Canada, 1987, Federal water policy: Minister of the Environment, 37
p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2014/ec/En4-247-1987-
eng.pdf.
Environment Canada, 2000, Canada Water Act annual report 1996–1997: Minister
of the Environment, 12 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_
2024/eccc/En1-20-1997-eng.pdf.
Freeze, A.R., and Cherry, J.A., 1979, Groundwater; Chapter 11: Groundwater and
Geologic Processes [Online Textbook]: The Groundwater Project, Pearson
Education Inc., https://fc79.gw-project.org.
Gerlak, A.K., 2005, Federalism and U.S. water policy: Lessons for the twenty-first
century: Publius: The Journal of Federalism, v. 36, p. 231–257, https://doi.org/
10.1093/publius/pji032.
Goffin, M., and Sullivan, M., 2024, Canada Water Agency update: National dialogue
on groundwater: Canada Water Agency.
Government of British Columbia, 2026, Groundwater communications and out-
reach [Online Newsletter]: Ministry of Water, Land and Resource Stewardship
and the Ministry of Environment and Parks, https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/
content/environment/air-land-water/water/groundwater-wells-aquifers/com-
munications-outreach.
Government of Canada, 1990, Canada’s green plan: the second year summary: Min-
isters of the Environment and of State Environment, CA9600844, 12 p.,
https://www.osti.gov/etdeweb/servlets/purl/409184.
Hania, P ., 2024, The Canada Water Act, 1970: Did parliamentarians seek cooperative
federalism?: Canadian Public Administration, v. 67, p. 344–360,
https://doi.org/10.1111/capa.12581.
Harford, D., 2015, Canada’s groundwater resources: visions for future governance:
Canadian Water Resources Journal, v. 40, p. 224–225, https://doi.org/10.1080/
07011784.2014.999826.
Hill, C., Furlong, K., Bakker, K., and Cohen, A., 2008, Harmonization versus sub-
sidiarity in water governance: A review of water governance and legislation in
the Canadian provinces and territories: Canadian Water Resources Journal, v.
33, p. 315–332, https://doi.org/10.4296/cwrj3304315.
Hinton, M.J., 2014, Groundwater-surface water interactions in Canada, in Rivera,
A.R., ed., Canada’s Groundwater Resources: Natural Resources Canada, p. 151–
185, https://doi.org/10.4095/291372.
Hodgins, G.E., Robinson, C.E., Power, C., and Roy, J.W ., 2025, Road salt chloride
exposure in urban streambeds and links to groundwater–surface water interac-
tion and salt sources: Science of the Total Environment, v. 957, no. 177488,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0048969724076459.
House of Commons of Canada, 2021, Motion 34, Instruction to the Standing Com-
mittee on Environment and Sustainable Development (freshwater): 43 rd
Parliament, 2nd Session, Sponsor Francis Scarpaleggia, https://www.ourcom-
mons.ca/members/en/francis-scarpaleggia(25453)/motions/10866649.
House of Commons of Canada, 2024, Freshwater: 44 th Parliament, 1 st
Session (November 22, 2021-January 6, 2025), Standing Committee on Envi-
ronment and Sustainable Development, Last meeting: Tuesday, June 18, 2024,
https://www.ourcommons.ca/committees/en/ENVI/StudyActivity?studyAc-
tivityId=11686248, accessed 2026-08-27.
House of Commons of Canada, 2026, Sustaining Canada’s freshwater for today and
tomorrow: 45th Parliament, 1st Session, Report of the Standing Committee on
Environment and Sustainable Development, Report 5, https://www.ourcom-
mons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/45-1/ENVI/report-5/.
IAH Canada [International Association of Hydrogeologists Canada], 2024, Ground-
water is critical to effective freshwater management in Canada [Brief]: Submis-
sion to the Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Develop-
ment, House of Commons of Canada, 10 p., https://www.ourcommons.ca/
Content/Committee/441/ENVI/Brief/BR13092640/br-external/Inter-
nationalAssociationOfHydrogeologists-e.pdf.
Interdepartmental Committee on Water, 1990, Federal freshwater policy, A Progress
Report: Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 93 p. 
Kim, S.G., and Kim, G.-B., 2019, Are groundwater monitoring networks economi-
cal? Cost-benefit analysis on the long-term groundwater supply project of
South Korea: Water, v. 11, no. 753, https://doi.org/10.3390/w11040753.
Kohut, A.P ., Riveria, A., Wei, M., Allen, D.M., and Nowlan, L., 2014, Chapter 16:
Groundwater management in Canada, in Kohut, A.P ., Riveria, A., Wei, M.,
Allen, D.M., and Nowlan, L., eds., Canada’s Groundwater Resources: Fitzhenry
and Whiteside Ltd., p. 639–663.
Larocque, M., and Thériault, J., 2026 , Cloud to Aquifer Natural Observatories
(CANO): Exploring the changing water cycle in eastern Canada [Online]: Cana-
da Foundation for Innovation infrastructure program, Université du Québec à
Montréal, https://chaire-eau.uqam.ca/projets/cloud-to-aquifer-natural-obser-
vatories-explorer-le-cycle-de-leau-de-lest-du-canada/, accessed 2026-05-27.
Lebel, D., Raeside, R., Boggs, K., and Hubley, P ., 2025, Recent labour and education
trends regarding geoscientists and geological engineers in Canada: Geoscience
Canada, v. 52, p. 69–80, https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2025.52.222.
Linnansaari, T., O’Sullivan, A.M., Breau, C., Corey, E.M., Collet, E.N., Curry, R.A.,
and Cunjak, R.A., 2023, The role of cold-water thermal refuges for stream
salmonids in a changing climate—Experiences from Atlantic Canada: Fishes, v.
8, no. 471, https://doi.org/10.3390/fishes8090471.
Madani, K., 2026, Global water bankruptcy: Living beyond our hydrological means
in the post-crisis era: United Nations University-Institute for Water, Environ-
ment and Health (UNU-INWEH), Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada, 72 p.,
https://doi.org/10.53328/INR26KAM001.
264 Hazen A.J. Russell, Andrew Kirkwood, Christine Rivard, M. Cathryn Ryan, and Cynthia N. McClain
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca
Marshall, R.E., Levison, J.K., McBean, E.A., Brown, E., and Harper, S.L., 2018,
Source water protection programs and Indigenous communities in Canada and
the United States: A scoping review: Journal of Hydrology, v. 562, p. 358–370,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2018.04.070.
Megdal, S.B., Gerlak, A.K., Varady, R.G., and Huang, L.-Y ., 2015, Groundwater gov-
ernance in the United States: Common priorities and challenges: Groundwater,
v. 53, p. 677–684, https://doi.org/10.1111/gwat.12294.
Morgan, A.V ., 1993, Ground water issues and research in Canada: A Report Pre-
pared for the Canadian Geoscience Council by the Task Force on Ground
Water Resources Research, 16 p.
Morris, T.J., Boyd, D.R., Brandes, O.M., Bruce, J.P , Hudon, M., Lucas, B., Maas, T.,
Nowlan, L., Pentland, R., and Phare, M., 2007, Changing the flow: A blueprint
for federal action on freshwater: The Gordon Water Group of Concerned Sci-
entists and Citizens, p. 64, https://gordonfoundation.ca/.
National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy, 2012, National Water
Forum Report: Moving to action: Minister of the Environment, 34 p.,
https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2012/trnee-nrtee/En134-
55-2012-eng.pdf.
Natural Resources Canada, 2019, 2013 Evaluation of the groundwater geoscience
program: Internal audits and evaluations: Departmental Performance Reports
2013–14, https://natural-resources.canada.ca/corporate/planning-reporting/
departmental-results-reports/departmental-performance-reports-2013-
14/internal-audits-evaluations.
Naylor, D., Atkinson, M., Birch, D., Fortier, P ., Hamel, C., Picard, M., and Stoddart,
J., 2017, Investing in Canada’s future: Strengthening the foundations of Cana-
dian research: Advisory Panel on Federal Support for Fundamental Science,
Government of Canada, 242 p., https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collec-
tion_2017/isde-ised/Iu4-223-2017-eng.pdf. 
Nowlan, L., 2005, Buried treasure: Groundwater permitting and pricing in Canada:
The Walter and Duncan Gordon Foundation, 118 p., https://gordonfounda-
tion.ca/.
O’Connor, D.R., 2002, Report of the Walkerton Inquiry: Part One- The events of
May 2000 and related issues: Ontario Ministry of the Attorney General, 35 p.
Office of the Prime Minister, 2019, December 13, Minister of Environment and
Climate Change mandate letter: Prime Minister of Canada’s website,
https://www.pm.gc.ca/en/mandate-letters/2019/12/13/archived-minister-
environment-and-climate-change-mandate-letter.
Paznekas, A., and Hayashi, M., 2016, Groundwater contribution to winter stream-
flow in the Canadian Rockies: Canadian Water Resources Journal, v. 41, p. 484–
499, https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1060870.
Pearse, P .H., and Quinn, F., 1996, Recent developments in federal water policy: One
step forward, two steps back: Canadian Water Resources Journal, v. 21, p. 329–
340, https://doi.org/10.4296/cwrj2104329.
Pearse, P .H., Bertrand, F., and MacLaren, J.W ., 1985, Currents of change: final
report, inquiry on federal water policy: Minister of the Environment, 222 p.,
https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2026/eccc/en40/En40-
1180-1985-eng.pdf.
Petersen-Perlman, J.D., Megdal, S.B., Gerlak, A.K., Wireman, M., Zuniga-Teran,
A.A., and Varady, R.G., 2018, Critical issues affecting groundwater quality gov-
ernance and management in the United States: Water, v. 10, no. 735,
https://doi.org/10.3390/w10060735.
Resources and Technical Surveys Act, 1985, Revised statutes of Canada, R-7:
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/R-7/page-1.html.
Rivera, A.R., 2014, Canada’s groundwater resources: Natural Resources Canada,
Fitzhenry and Whiteside Ltd., 803 p., https://doi.org/10.4095/293431.
Rivera, A.R., Crowe, A., Kohut, A., Rudolph, D., Baker, C.L., Pupek, D., Shaheen,
N., Lewis, C.F.M., and Parks, K., 2003, Canadian framework for collaboration
on groundwater: Natural Ad Hoc Committee on Groundwater, 62 p.,
https://doi.org/10.4095/214620.
Russell, H.A.J., McClain, C.N., Ryan, M.C., Kirkwood, A., Cervoni, L., Rivard, C., Di
Iorio, T., and Boisvert, E., in preparation, Public groundwater science and policy
in Canada: Challenges of jurisdiction, funding and capacity: Natural Resources
Canada, Geological Survey of Canada, Open File Report. 
Ryan, M.C., McClain, C.N., Mulligan, B., and Jackson, R., 2026, Inclusion of ground-
water within Canada’s freshwater monitoring: Canadian Water Resources Jour-
nal, v. 51, p. 270–276, https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2026.2702352.
Schaefer, K.A., and Bielak, A.T., 2006, Linking water science to policy: Results from
a series of national workshops on water: Environmental Monitoring and
Assessment, v. 113, p. 431–442, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-005-9093-5.
Senate of Canada, 2005, Water in the West: Under pressure: 38th Parliament, 1st Ses-
sion, Report of the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the Environment
and Natural Resources, Report 13, 21 p., https://sencanada.ca/en/Content/
SEN/Committee/381/enrg/rep/rep13nov05-e.
Sharpe, D.R., Russell, H.A.J., Dyke, L.D., Grasby, S.E., Gleeson, T., Michaud, Y .,
Savard, M.M., Wei, M., and Wozniak, P .R.J., 2014, Hydrogeological regions of
Canada, in Rivera, A.R., ed., Canada’s Groundwater Resources: Natural
Resources Canada, Fitzhenry and Whiteside Ltd., p. 266–299, https://doi.org/
10.4095/296943.
Storb, M.B., Bussell, A.M., Caldwell Eldridge, S.L., Hirsch, R.M., and Schmidt, T.S.,
2023, Growth of coal mining operations in the Elk River Valley (Canada) linked
to increasing solute transport of Se, NO3–, and SO42– into the Transboundary
Koocanusa Reservoir (USA–Canada): Environmental Science and Technology,
v. 57, p. 17465–17480, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.3c05090.
Subcommittee on Ground Water, 2013 (revised), A national framework for ground-
water monitoring in the United States: United States Geological Survey, The
Advisory Committee on Water Information, 170 p., https://www.usgs.gov/
apps/ngwmn/.
Tellier, G., 2022, Chapter 21. The Canadian federal 1994–1996 program review:
Appraising a success 25 years later, in Lindquist, E., Howlett, M., Skogstad, G.,
Tellier, G., and ’t Hart, P ., eds., Policy Success in Canada: Oxford University
Press, Oxford, p. 416–437, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780192897046.
003.0021.
Trainer, M.A., Baveye, P ., and Syme, G., 2010, Goals, gaps and governance: The holy
grail in preserving Canada’s hidden liquid gold: Journal of Hydrology, v. 380, p.
1–3, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.09.031.
United Nations, 2022, The United Nations World Water Development Report 2022:
Groundwater: Making the invisible visible: UNESCO, Paris, 225 p.,
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000380721.
Van Stempvoort, D.R., MacKay, D.R., Collins, P ., and Koehler, G., 2022, Nutrient
delivery by groundwater discharge to headwater streams in agricultural catch-
ments:  Hydrological Processes, v. 36, no. e14724,  https://doi.org/10.1002/
hyp.14724.
Winter, T.C., Harvey, J.W ., Franke, O.L., and Alley, W .M., 1998, Ground water and
surface water: A single resource: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1139, 79 p.,
https://doi.org/10.3133/cir1139.
Wood, W .W ., and Cherry, J.A., 2021, Food security and inaccurate quantification of
groundwater irrigation use: Groundwater, v. 59, p. 782–783, https://doi.org/
10.1111/gwat.13122.
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987, Our common future
(United Nations Document A_42_427): Brundtland Report: Oxford University
Press, 301 p., https://www.brundtland.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/
Brundtland-Report-1987-Our-Common-Future.pdf.
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeler, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe,
J., Li, G., and Kharin, V .V ., 2019, Temperature and precipitation across Canada,
in Bush, E., and Lemmen, D.S., eds., Canada’s Changing Climate Report: Gov-
ernment of Canada, p. 112–193, https://doi.org/10.4095/327811.
Received August 2026 
Accepted as revised September 2026 
GEOSCIENCE CANADA Volume 53 2026 265
https://doi.org/10.12789/geocanj.2026.53.236
266
http://www.geosciencecanada.ca