This is a preprint submitted to EarthArXiv.
This manuscript has been peer-reviewed and approved for 
publication as a preprint by the U.S. Geological Surv ey. 
Please note the manuscript has yet to be formally 
accepted for publication. Subsequent versions of this 
manuscript may have slightly different content. If accepted, 
the final version of this manuscript will be available 
via the ‘Peer-reviewed Publication DOI’ link on the right-
hand side of this webpage. Please feel free to contact any 
of the authors; we welcome feedback.
1 
Prepared in cooperation with Kankakee River Basin and Yellow River Basin 
Development Commission 
Evaluating Bank Restoration and Stabilization in the 
Yellow River in Northern Indiana: Mitigation of 
Sediment and Nutrient Transport 
By. Aleia M. Dumond, Brittany R. Hanrahan, Aubrey R. Bunch 
This information product has been peer reviewed and approved for publication as a preprint by 
the U.S. Geological Survey. 
A
ny use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply 
endorsement by the U.S. Government. 
Although this information product, for the most part, is in the public domain, it also may contain 
copyrighted materials as noted in the text. Permission to reproduce copyrighted items must be 
secured from the copyright owner. 
2 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge our cooperator the Kankakee River Basin and 
Yellow River Basin Development Commission. Specifically, the Executive Director Scott Pelath 
for sharing vital information on the timing and details of remediation work in the Yellow River. 
Authors would also like to acknowledge Madelyn M. Messner, Eric M. Burns, Cole R. 
Downhour, and Mary Kate Perkins for their efforts in field data collection, review, and approval. 
Outline 
Acknowledgments 
Introduction 
Purpose and Scope 
Study Area and Site Selection 
Approach and Methods for Data Collection and Analysis 
Data Collection Methods 
Statistical Methods 
General Statistical Approach 
Comparison of Water Quality Before and After Remediation 
Comparison of Water Quality Among Sites After Remediation 
Results and Discussion 
Did water quality differ before and after remediation? 
Did water quality differ among sites after remediation? 
Limitations and Considerations 
Summary 
References Cited 
Appendix 1. Statistical Output Summaries 
 
Figures 
Figure 1. Map of the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow River Basin in northwest Indiana. Basins were 
delineated using USGS streamstats (USGS, 2019). 
Figure 2. Photographs taken before, during, and after Phase 1 remediation at locations 30–150 meters 
upstream from USGS 05516665 Yellow River near Oak Grove, Indiana. Photographs provided by Scott 
Pelath, Executive Director of the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow River Basin Development Commission. 
A) Before remediation, December 2020; B) during remediation construction, September 2021; C) after 
remediation, September 2024; and D) after remediation, November 2024. 
3 
 
Figure 3. Locations of U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) streamgages, discrete-sampling sites, and 
remediation extents in the Yellow River study area, northwest Indiana. 
Figure 4. Discharge hydrographs for the post-remediation study period and discrete sampling times for the 
Yellow River sites at Plymouth, Oak Grove, and Knox, northwest Indiana. 
Figure 5. Discrete sample data plotted for the turbidity (T) to discharge (Q) relationship at (a) Oak 
Grove and (b) Knox, with generalized least squares regression model lines for the pre-remediation and 
post-remediation periods. 
Figure 6. Boxplots showing the data for (A-B), daily mean discharge; (C-D), daily mean turbidity; and (E-
F), discrete suspended-sediment concentrations before and after remediation at Oak Grove and 
Knox. Boxplots show the distribution and median of the observed data. Diamonds represent estimated 
marginal means for each variable as a result of statistical tests; generalized least square 
regression for discharge and turbidity and linear mixed-effects regression for suspended-sediment 
concentrations. 
Figure 7. Differences in discharge, turbidity, and turbidity- discharge relations at Plymouth, Oak Grove, and 
Knox during the post-remediation period of the Yellow River remediation study, northwest Indiana. 
(A) mean weekly discharge; (B) mean daily turbidity; (C) relation between mean daily turbidity 
and mean daily discharge. For A and B, discrete sample data are used for depicted boxplots, 
and diamonds represent estimated marginal means from generalized least-squares models. Lower case 
letters, a and b, above boxplots indicate statistically significant differences (p<0.05) between groups. For C, 
discrete sample data is overlain by generalized least squares regression lines for each site. 
Figure 8. Boxplots of discrete measurements of A, discharge; B, suspended sediment; C, total 
nitrogen; D, nitrate plus nitrite; E, nitrite; F, ammonia; G, phosphorus; H, orthophosphate along Yellow 
River at Plymouth, Upas Rd, Oak Grove, CR1100E, and Knox during the post-remediation 
period. Diamonds represent estimated marginal means from linear mixed-effects models. Groups with 
statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters. 
Figure 9. Boxplots of instantaneous flux calculated from discrete sample results for A, suspended 
sediment; B, total nitrogen; C, nitrate plus nitrite; D, nitrite; E, ammonia; F, phosphorus; and G, 
orthophosphate along Yellow River at Plymouth, Upas Rd, Oak Grove, CR1100E, and Knox during the 
post-remediation period. Diamonds represent estimated marginal means from linear mixed-effects 
models. Groups with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters. 
 
Tables 
Table 1. Site locations, characteristics and data used in the Yellow River remediation study, northwest 
Indiana. 
Table 2. Timeline of data collection at study sites and remediation activities on the Yellow River in 
northwest, Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
Table 3. Percent land use within the drainage basin of each of the three continuous water-quality sites on 
the Yellow River in northwest Indiana. Site short name from table 1. 
Table 4. Constituents analyzed and the analytical methods for discrete water-quality samples collected 
during the Yellow River remediation study, northwest Indiana. 
Table 5. Statistical tests used to address the research question, “Did water quality differ before and after 
remediation?” for the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
Table 6. Statistical tests used to address the research question, "Did water quality differ among sites after 
remediation?" for the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
4 
 
Table 7. Results of comparisons of turbidity-discharge slopes and estimated marginal means for discharge, 
turbidity, and suspended-sediment concentrations at two Yellow River sites in northwest Indiana before and 
after remediation. 
Table 8. Comparison of turbidity- discharge slopes, mean daily turbidity, and mean daily discharge among 
three sites (Plymouth, Oak Grove, and Knox) on the Yellow River during the post-remediation period. 
Estimates and standard errors, as well as significant differences among sites found using post hoc pairwise 
comparison tests are presented. Sites with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by 
different lowercase letters. 
Table 9. Estimated marginal mean discharge and concentrations of suspended sediment and nutrients 
measured in discrete water-quality samples collected at five sites along the Yellow River, northwest Indiana 
during the post-remediation period. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate differences in mean 
concentrations among sites. Groups with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by 
different lowercase letters. 
Table 10. Estimated marginal mean instantaneous fluxes of suspended sediment and nutrients measured 
in discrete water-quality samples collected at five sites along the Yellow River, northwest Indiana during the 
post-remediation period. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate differences in mean loads 
among sites. Sites with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase 
letters. 
Table 11. Fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed-effect models evaluating the direction and significance 
of upstream-to-downstream trends in post-remediation sediment and nutrient concentrations and fluxes in 
the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. 
Appendix 1.1. Statistical summary of generalized least square regression (GLS) models comparing 
turbidity-discharge relations (test 1a) and mean discharge (test 1b), as well as results from a linear mixed 
effects (LME) model comparing suspended sediment concentration, between periods before and after 
remediation in the Yellow River, Indiana. Bolded p-values denote fixed effects of interest and asterisks 
denote fixed effects of interest that were significant (p<0.05). 
Appendix 1.2. Statistical summary of generalized least square regression (GLS) models comparing 
turbidity-discharge relations (test 2a) and mean discharge (test 2b) among sites in post-remediation period. 
Bolded p-values denote fixed effects of interest and asterisks denote fixed effects of interest that were 
significant (p<0.05). 
Appendix 1.3. Site fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed effects regression models comparing mean 
water-quality concentrations among five sites on the Yellow River in the post-remediation period (test 2c). 
For each parameter, models were fit with site as a fixed effect, natural log-transformed discharge as a 
covariate, and with random effects specified as described in the Methods. Reported coefficient estimates 
represent differences in mean natural log-transformed concentration at each site relative to the reference 
site (Plymouth), adjusted for discharge and date-level random effects. Pairwise comparisons among site 
estimated marginal means (Tukey-adjusted) are presented in table 9 of the report. 
Appendix 1.4. Site fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed effects regression models comparing mean 
water-quality fluxes among five sites on the Yellow River in the post-remediation period (test 2c). For each 
parameter, models were fit with site as a fixed effect, season as a fixed effect to account for flow variability, 
and with random effects specified as described in the Methods. Reported coefficient estimates represent 
differences in mean natural log-transformed flux at each site relative to the reference site (Plymouth), 
adjusted for season and date-level random effects. Pairwise comparisons among site estimated marginal 
means (Tukey-adjusted) are presented in table 10 of the report. 
Appendix 1.5. Summary of statistical results from log-likelihood ratio tests between a full linear mixed 
effects (LME) model where site order was included as a fixed effect and a null LME model were site order 
5 
 
was not included for sediment and nutrient concentrations and loads in the Yellow River remediation study 
in northwest Indiana. 
 
Conversion Factors 
U.S. customary units to International System of Units 
International System of Units to U.S. customary units 
Multiply By To obtain 
Length 
kilometer (km) 0.6214 mile (mi) 
meter (m) 1.094 yard (yd) 
Area 
square meter (m2) 0.0002471 acre 
hectare (ha) 2.471 acre 
square hectometer (hm2) 2.471 acre 
square kilometer (km2) 247.1 acre 
hectare (ha) 0.003861 square mile (mi2) 
square kilometer (km2) 0.3861 square mile (mi2) 
Volume 
cubic centimeter (cm3) 0.06102 cubic inch (in3) 
cubic decimeter (dm3) 61.02 cubic inch (in3) 
liter (L) 61.02 cubic inch (in3) 
cubic decimeter (dm3) 0.03531 cubic foot (ft3) 
cubic meter (m3) 35.31 cubic foot (ft3) 
Flow rate 
meter per second (m/s) 3.281 foot per second (ft/s) 
meter per hour (m/h) 39.37 inch per hour (in/h) 
millimeter per year (mm/yr) 0.03937 inch per year (in/yr) 
kilometer per hour (km/h) 0.6214 mile per hour (mi/h) 
Mass 
gram (g) 0.03527 ounce, avoirdupois (oz) 
kilogram (kg) 2.205 pound avoirdupois (lb) 
metric ton (t) 1.102 ton, short [2,000 lb] 
metric ton (t) 0.9842 ton, long [2,240 lb] 
 
Temperature in degrees Celsius (°C) may be converted to degrees Fahrenheit (°F) as follows: 
°F = (1.8 × °C) + 32. 
Temperature in degrees Fahrenheit (°F) may be converted to degrees Celsius (°C) as follows: 
°C = (°F – 32) / 1.8. 
6 
 
Datums 
Vertical coordinate information is referenced to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88). 
Horizontal coordinate information is referenced to the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). 
Supplemental Information 
Turbidity is in Formazin Nephelometric Units (FNU). 
Abbreviations 
Basin commission Kankakee River Basin Yellow River Basin Development Commission 
USGS U.S. Geological Survey 
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology 
LRT Likelihood ratio test 
GLS generalized least squares 
LMM linear mixed models 
 
7 
 
Abstract 
The U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow 
River Basin Development Commission, evaluated the effects of streambank remediation on the 
Yellow River in northwest Indiana. Two phases of remediation were completed on the Yellow 
River between 2021 and 2023, after assessments indicated it was a large contributor of sediment 
to the Kankakee River. Temporal effects were assessed using pre‑remediation (April 2019 –
October 2021) and post‑remediation (February – October 2024) data from two long‑term 
monitoring sites, USGS 05516665 Yellow River near Oak Grove (Oak Grove) and USGS 
05517000 Yellow River at Knox (Knox). Spatial patterns were evaluated among sites from 
upstream to downstream during the post-remediation period. Monitoring included the pre-
existing Oak Grove and Knox sites, an additional monitoring site at USGS streamgage 05516500 
Yellow River at Plymouth (Plymouth), and discrete sampling at two additional sites. Discrete 
sites include USGS 05516663 Yellow River at Upas Rd near Oak Grove (Upas Rd), located 
upstream of the remediation reach, and USGS 05516667 Yellow River at CR11100E near Oak 
Grove (CR1100E), located within the remediation reach. 
Generalized least squares and linear mixed‑effects regression models were used to 
evaluate temporal differences in turbidity-to-discharge relations for slope and turbidity units, 
discharge, and suspended‑sediment in before and after remediation data. Similar analysis using 
generalized least squares and linear mixed‑effects regression models were conducted for spatial 
analysis of discharge and sediment and nutrient concentrations and fluxes at each site post-
remediation. Temporal comparisons showed that turbidity increased less with discharge 
increases after remediation, indicated by slope of relation, at both Oak Grove and Knox, 
8 
 
indicating improved water clarity during higher flows. Mean turbidity and suspended‑sediment 
concentrations were not statistically different between remediation periods. 
Comparison of the post-remediation continuous water quality data from upstream to 
downstream sites through the remediated reaches indicated that downstream sites exhibited 
steeper turbidity‑to‑discharge slopes than the upstream control site at Plymouth. A statistically 
significant difference was detected between the slopes at Oak Grove and Plymouth, whereas 
Knox did not differ significantly from either Plymouth or Oak Grove. Downstream sites had 
significantly lower mean turbidity, suggesting improved water clarity within and downstream of 
the remediation reach. Nutrient concentrations generally decreased moving downstream and 
suspended‑sediment concentrations showed no consistent trend. Nutrient and sediment fluxes 
increased downstream, likely reflecting the influence of greater discharge volumes. 
Interpretation of remediation effects was limited by the absence of pre‑remediation data 
at upstream sites and by the short post‑remediation monitoring period. Continued monitoring 
could allow for assessment of longer‑term responses to streambank remediation on the Yellow 
River, as effects may become more pronounced over time. 
Plain Language Summary 
Human activity has substantially shaped the Kankakee River Basin in Indiana, including 
widespread settlement and agriculture near the Yellow and Kankakee Rivers. These 
modifications have led to increased sediment and nutrient inputs into waterbodies, contributing 
to downstream sedimentation and excess nutrients. In 2024, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 
expanded monitoring and sampling on the Yellow River to evaluate how streambank remediation 
may be affecting sediment and nutrient transport within the river. This study examined pre- and 
9 
 
post-remediation conditions at two sites and examined upstream-to-downstream patterns across 
five sites, following two remediation phases completed from 2021 to 2023. At sites where data is 
available for before and after remediation efforts, there was evidence of improved water clarity, 
shown by generally lower relations in discharge and turbidity after remediation. Post-remediation 
data collected along the river in 2024 indicated nutrient concentrations generally decreased 
moving from upstream to downstream sites, whereas sediment concentrations showed no 
consistent increase or decrease downstream. Nutrient and sediment fluxes increased from 
upstream to downstream sites, but this was likely due to higher discharge, rather than increases 
in concentration. Overall, remediation sites showed some signs of reduced concentrations, but 
downstream hydrology continued to drive the amount of material carried downstream. As 
remediation efforts become more established and expand in the watershed, these improvements 
in water quality may become more pronounced. 
Introduction 
The greater Kankakee River Basin extends from northwest Indiana to northeast Illinois 
(fig. 1). The basin once included the Grand Kankakee Marsh, historically the largest wetland in 
the Midwestern United States (Meyer, 1935). In the late 19th and early 20th century, the Grand 
Kankakee Marsh was drained by channelization of the rivers; a process of deepening, widening, 
and straightening the rivers (Little Jr and Jonas, 2013; Demissie and others, 2016). Additionally, 
extensive sub-surface drainage (tile systems) was implemented to more efficiently remove 
excess water from the land so that the fertile soil surrounding the river could be used for 
agriculture (Mitsch and Gosselicnk, 2000; Little Jr and Jonas, 2013; Demissie and others, 
2016). This process resulted in the elimination of most of the wetlands in the Kankakee River 
10 
 
Basin (Mitsch and Gosselicnk, 2000). Increased bank slopes and water velocities caused by 
channelization in the basin have been linked to increased erosion and sediment transport (Little 
Jr and Jonas, 2013). As a result, stakeholders including The Kankakee River Basin and Yellow 
River Basin Development Commission (hereafter referred to as “the Basin Commission”) have 
undergone efforts to identify and mitigate erosion and sediment transport within the basins. 
 
Figure 1. Map of the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow River Basin in northwest Indiana. Basins were 
delineated using USGS streamstats (USGS, 2019). 
The Yellow River is a major source of sandy sediment to the Kankakee River because its 
steep banks and sandy channel make it highly susceptible to erosion (Little Jr. and Jonas, 2013). 
Located upstream of the Kankakee River Basin, the HUC 10 (0712000105) Headwaters Yellow 
River Watershed is listed on Indiana Department of Environmental Management’s 303(d) 
11 
 
impaired waters list for impaired biotic communities, elevated Escherichia coli, and high nutrient 
levels (Indiana Department of Environmental Management, 2017). Since these headwaters 
strongly influence downstream conditions, including the focus area of this study, comprehensive 
sediment and nutrient monitoring and management are critical to protect ecological resources 
and public health in the Yellow River, Kankakee River, and further downstream reaches (Kelly 
and others, 2019). 
To help inform management decisions in the greater Kankakee River Basin, the U.S. 
Geological Survey (USGS) in cooperation with the Basin Commission installed a continuous 
water-quality monitoring network along the Yellow and Kankakee Rivers. In 2016, the network 
consisted of three monitoring sites (hereafter referred to as sites) on the Kankakee River, one site 
on the Iroquois River, and three sites on the Yellow River (table 1, described below). Sites on the 
Kankakee and Iroquois Rivers continuously monitored river gage height, discharge, water 
temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen, specific conductance, turbidity, and nitrate plus nitrite while 
the sites on the Yellow River monitored river gage height, discharge, temperature, and turbidity. 
Discrete water quality samples were also collected and analyzed for suspended sediment at all 
sites, and for nitrogen and phosphorus constituents at the Kankakee and Iroquois River sites. 
Before this study, the relation between discrete and continuous data was used to estimate 
continuous concentrations and fluxes of suspended sediment at the Yellow River and Kankakee 
River sites (Lathrop and others, 2019; Downhour and Piotrowski, 2025). 
In 2019, basin management recommendations were presented in the “Kankakee River 
Flood and Sediment Management Work Plan”, which outlines a 40-year schedule of sediment 
management actions for the Kankakee River Basin (Christopher B. Burke Engineering, LLC, 
2019). Management actions on the Yellow River were prioritized, with several scheduled for 
12 
 
implementation during 2020 –2026. Bank reconstruction along sections of the Yellow River was 
planned in four phases. By the start of data collection for this study in 2024, phases 1 and 2 had 
been completed, phase 3 was in progress, and phase 4 remained in the design stage. Collectively, 
these phased efforts are hereafter referred to as remediation. Photos before, during, and after 
remediation for Phase 1 in parts of the Yellow River are shown in figure 2. Other ongoing 
mitigation efforts in the Kankakee River Basin include log jam management, bridge removal or 
replacement, berm maintenance, sediment traps and storage areas for runoff events, and flood-
protection measures (Christopher B. Burke Engineering, LLC, 2019). 
 
Figure 2. Photographs taken before, during, and after Phase 1 remediation at locations 30–150 meters 
upstream from USGS 05516665 Yellow River near Oak Grove, Indiana. Photographs provided by Scott 
Pelath, Executive Director of the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow River Basin Development Commission. 
A) Before remediation, December 2020; B) during remediation construction, September 2021; C) after 
remediation, September 2024; and D) after remediation, November 2024. 
13 
 
Following the completion of the first two phases of bank reconstruction in the Yellow 
River (2023), the USGS, in cooperation with the Basin Commission, expanded water-quality 
monitoring along the Yellow River. In addition to the two long-term Yellow River monitoring 
sites used in this study, a continuous monitoring site was added upstream from the remediated 
reaches, and two additional discrete-sampling sites were selected near the remediated reaches. 
Thus, there were three sites within the study area collecting real-time data and five sites where 
discrete samples were collected for both sediment and nutrient concentrations. The goal of this 
study was to assess how remediation efforts may have affected sediment and nutrient 
concentrations and flux dynamics in the Yellow River. 
Purpose and Scope 
This report describes changes in water quality in the Yellow River and evaluates how 
those changes may relate to remediation efforts. The study focuses on two overarching questions: 
(1) Did water quality differ between the pre‑remediation and post‑remediation periods? 
(2) Did water quality differ among sites along the Yellow River after remediation? 
Data from selected Yellow River sites was used to statistically evaluate temporal differences 
before (April 2019– August 2021) and after (February 2024– October 2024) remediation, as well 
as spatial differences from upstream to downstream after completion of phases 1 and 2 of 
remediation. 
Study Area and Site Selection 
The Yellow River Basin has a drainage area of 438 mi2 and lies within the southeastern 
portion of the greater Kankakee River Basin. The Yellow River begins south of South Bend, 
14 
 
Indiana and reaches west of Knox, Indiana before the confluence with the Kankakee River (fig. 
1). The downstream reaches of the Yellow River are within the Kankakee Outwash and 
Lacustrine Plain physiographic unit, characterized by broad, flat areas with poor drainage and 
covered with glacial outwash, dune sand, alluvial deposits and lake sand, while the upstream 
portion of the Yellow River is within the Steuben Morainal Lake Area physiographic unit, 
consisting of undulated till plains (Fenelon and others, 1992). Surface deposits along the Yellow 
River consist of well sorted sand and gravel that were deposited during the retreat of the last 
continental glaciers (Ivens and others, 1981). 
Sites selected for this study (table 1) were chosen based on remediation efforts from 
Phase 1 (completed by 2021) and Phase 2 (completed 2023) of The Basin Commission's work 
plan (table 2). This included two long-term water-quality streamgage sites — USGS 05516665 
Yellow River near Oak Grove, IN (Oak Grove), and USGS 05517000 Yellow River at Knox, IN 
(Knox) — where continuous and discrete data were collected before and after remediation. A 
newly installed water-quality streamgage, USGS 05516500, Yellow River at Plymouth, IN 
(Plymouth), provided continuous and discrete data after remediation. Discrete water-quality 
samples also were collected after remediation at USGS 05516663 Yellow River at Upas Rd near 
Oak Grove, IN (Upas Rd), and USGS 05516667 Yellow River at CR1100E nr Oak Grove, IN 
(CR1100E) (tables 1 and 2; fig. 3). For clarity, site short names are followed by (U) for sites 
upstream from remediation, (R) for sites within the remediated reach, and (D) for sites 
downstream from remediation, as described in table 1. 
Land use in the Yellow River Basin study area is dominated by agriculture but varies 
slightly from the most upstream to the most downstream site (table 3; USGS, 2024). In 2024, 
agricultural land use in the basin was dominated by cultivated crops which decreased from 77.00 
15 
 
percent at the most upstream site, Plymouth (U), to 70.20 percent at the most downstream site, 
Knox (D). Developed land accounted for 12.09 to 12.75 percent of the drainage basins and 
consisted primarily of developed open space and low-intensity development. Table 3 provides a 
breakdown of land use for the drainage basins of the Plymouth (U), Oak Grove (R), and Knox 
(D), water-quality streamgages. 
16 
 
Table 1. Site locations, characteristics and data used in the Yellow River remediation study, northwest Indiana. 1 
[Site information from U.S. Geological Survey (2025); USGS, U.S. Geological Survey; U, upstream from remediation; R, within remediation; D, downstream from remediation; IN, Indiana; SS; 
suspended sediment; Rd, road; nr, near; n.a., not applicable; ~, approximately; CR 1100E, County Road 1100 East] 
Short 
name 
Remediation 
Status 
USGS station 
name 
USGS station 
number 
Continuous 
Parameters Link to Continuous Data 
Discrete 
Parameters 
(2019 –2022) 
Discrete 
Parameters 
(2024) 
Drainage 
area, in 
square miles 
Remediation Details 
Plymouth U 
Yellow River 
at Plymouth, 
IN 
05516500 
Discharge, 
Temperature, 
Turbidity 
https://waterdata.usgs.g
ov/monitoring-
location/USGS-
05516500 
n.a. Nutrientsa 
and SS 294 ~18 river miles upstream from 
remediation phase 1 
Upas Rd U 
Yellow River 
at Upas Rd nr 
Oak Grove, IN 
05516663 n.a. n.a. n.a. Nutrientsa 
and SS 377 ~ 1 river miles upstream from 
remediation phase 1 
Oak 
Grove R 
Yellow River 
nr Oak Grove, 
IN 
05516665 
Discharge, 
Temperature, 
Turbidity 
https://waterdata.usgs.g
ov/monitoring-
location/USGS-
05516665 
SS Nutrientsa 
and SS 377 ~0.6 river miles within 
remediation phase 1 
CR1100
E R 
Yellow River 
at CR 1100E nr 
Oak Grove, IN 
05516667 n.a. n.a. n.a. Nutrientsa 
and SS 379 
after ~2 river miles of phase I 
remediation - beginning of 
phase 2 
Knox D Yellow River 
at Knox, IN 05517000 
Discharge, 
Temperature, 
Turbidity 
https://waterdata.usgs.g
ov/monitoring-
location/USGS-
05517000 
SS Nutrientsa 
and SS 435 ~1 river mile downstream 
from phase 2 of remediation 
a Nutrients include: Total Nitrogen as N, water, unfiltered; Nitrate plus nitrite as N, water, filtered; Total ammonia as N, water, filtered; Nitrite as N, water, filtered; Phosphorus, as P, water, 
unfiltered; Orthophosphate as P, water, filtered 
 2 
17 
 
Table 2. Timeline of data collection at study sites and remediation activities on the Yellow River in 
northwest, Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
Calendar 
Year 
Continuous and 
Discrete Data Sites 
*Discrete Data Only 
Sites Continuous Parameters Discrete Parameters Remediation Details 
2019 Oak Grove & Knox 
 
Discharge and Turbidity Suspended Sediment 
Concentration 
 
2020 Oak Grove & Knox 
 
Discharge and Turbidity Suspended Sediment 
Concentration 
 
2021 Oak Grove & Knox 
 
Discharge and Turbidity Suspended Sediment 
Concentration 
Phase 1 - about 1.25 
consecutive river miles - 
09/2021 to 12/2022 
2022 Oak Grove & Knox 
 
Discharge and Turbidity Suspended Sediment 
Concentration 
2023 Oak Grove & Knox 
 
Discharge and Turbidity Suspended Sediment 
Concentration 
Phase 2 - about 1.2 non -
contiguous river miles - 
07/2023 to 12/2023 
2024 Plymouth, Oak Grove, 
& Knox 
Upas & 1100 E 
(Upstream and 
downstream Oak 
Grove) 
Discharge and Turbidity 
Suspended Sediment 
Concentration and 
Dissolved and Total 
Nutrient 
Concentration 
Phase 3 - in progress and 
not considered for this 
study 
 
Table 3. Percent land use within the drainage basin of each of the three continuous water-quality sites 
on the Yellow River in northwest Indiana. Site short name from table 1. 
[Data from U.S. Geological Survey, 2024] 
Land use type 
Percent land use by site 
Knox Oak Grove Plymouth 
Agriculture 70.23 74.76 77.00 
Developed 12.60 12.75 12.09 
Forest 9.92 6.68 5.92 
Wetland 5.57 5.05 4.41 
Open water 0.56 0.41 0.36 
Other 1.13 0.35 0.22 
 
 
18 
 
 
Figure 3. Locations of U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) streamgages, discrete-sampling sites, and 
remediation extents in the Yellow River study area, northwest Indiana. 
19 
 
Approach and Methods for Data Collection and Analysis 
Continuous water‑quality and streamflow data used to evaluate remediation efforts on the 
Yellow River were obtained from USGS streamgages (fig. 3, table 1). Parameters used in the 
study included gage height (ft), discharge (ft³/s), and turbidity (FNU). Prior to 2024, continuous 
water-quality data were available only at the Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) streamgages. In 
February 2024, continuous water-quality monitoring was expanded to include the Plymouth (U) 
site. Discrete water‑quality samples were collected at all five monitoring sites in from February 
to October 2024 and analyzed for suspended-sediment concentration; total nitrogen and total 
phosphorus; and dissolved nutrient species, including nitrate plus nitrite, nitrate, total ammonia, 
and orthophosphate. Before 2024, suspended-sediment concentration was measured only at Oak 
Grove (R) and Knox (D). 
Question One, “Did water quality differ before and after remediation?” was addressed by 
applying statistical tests to compare pre‑ and post‑remediation data. Question Two, “Did water 
quality differ among sites along the Yellow River after remediation?” was addressed by 
comparing post‑remediation data among sites. 
For all analyses in this study, the pre-remediation period was defined as April 2019 
through August 2021, and the post-remediation period was defined as February 2024 through 
October 2024. These periods were selected based on the availability and type of data collected 
and the timing of remediation phases (table 2). Detailed methods for data collection and 
statistical analyses are provided below. 
20 
 
Data Collection Methods 
Plymouth (U), Oak Grove (R), and Knox (D) are USGS streamgages with continuous 
water-quality monitors. Continuous gage height was recorded per USGS protocols and used to 
compute estimated discharge values for every 15-minute gage height value (Kennedy, 1984, 
Turnipseed and Sauer, 2010). The closest 15-minute discharge value for each of the three 
streamgage sites was used for associated discrete samples. At Upas Rd (U) and CR1100E (R), 
which are not co-located with USGS streamgages, discrete discharge measurements were made 
during each sampling event. The only exception occurred on June 18, 2024, when an equipment 
malfunction prevented a discharge measurement at CR1100E (R). For that date, discharge was 
estimated using data from the Oak Grove (R) streamgage because the difference in drainage area 
between the two sites is minimal. Continuous and discrete discharge data are available through 
the USGS National Water Information System —Water Data for the Nation (USGS, 2025). 
Continuous water-quality was monitored at Plymouth (U), Oak Grove (R), and Knox (D), 
(table 1, fig. 3) following USGS protocols (Wagner and others, 2006). Water temperature and 
turbidity were measured using YSI EXO instruments (Xylem Incorporated, Yellow Springs, OH, 
YSI Inc., 2024), but only turbidity data were used in the analysis presented in this report. 
Turbidity is a measure of water clarity, often used as an indicator of in-stream suspended-
sediment conditions. At Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D), water-quality monitoring of temperature 
and turbidity using a YSI EXO sensor started in 2019. At Plymouth (U) the water-quality 
monitor was deployed in February 2024, before expanded discrete sampling began at all five 
sites. 
Discrete water-quality samples were collected 20 times at the five sites along the Yellow 
River between February 29 and October 23, 2024. Samples were collected using nationally 
21 
 
consistent field protocols for equal-width-interval sampling described in the USGS National 
Field Manual for the Collection of Water-Quality Data (USGS, 2006) and submitted to USGS 
laboratories for nutrient and sediment analyses (table 4). Samples were collected approximately 
biweekly, providing coverage for a wide range of discharges (fig. 4). On each sampling date, all 
five sites were sampled on the same day to capture relative hydrologic conditions. For each 
sample, the entire cross-section of the stream was sampled twice, either sequentially or 
concurrently depending on conditions, to produce one composite sample for nutrient analysis and 
one composite sample for sediment analysis. All discrete water-quality results were reviewed 
and quality assured by USGS personnel. The discrete water-quality results are publicly available 
through the Water Quality Portal (USGS and others, 2024). 
Table 4. Constituents analyzed and the analytical methods for discrete water-quality samples collected 
during the Yellow River remediation study, northwest Indiana. 
[LRL, laboratory reporting level; N, nitrogen; µm, micrometers; mg/L, milligram per liter; NWQL, U.S. Geological Survey National Water Quality 
Laboratory; <, less than; mL, milliliter; H2SO4, sulfuric acid; P, phosphorus; EPA, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; mm millimeter; n.a., not 
applicable] 
Constituent Field Preservation Method Analysis Method Method reference LRL Units Laboratory 
Sediment 
Suspended-sediment 
concentration n.a Filtration Shreve and 
Downs, 2005 1 mg/L 
 Kentucky 
Sediment 
Laboratory 
Nutrients 
Total Nitrogen as N, 
water, unfiltered 
No filtration, acidify to 
pH <2 with 1 mL 4.5 
normality H2SO4, chill 
Alkaline persulfate 
digestion 
Patton and Krys-
kalla, 2003 0.1 mg/L NWQL 
Nitrate+nitrite as N, 
water, filtered 0.45-µm filter, chill Colorimetry by enzy-
matic reduction 
Patton and Krys-
kalla, 2011 0.08 mg/L NWQL 
Total ammonia as N, 
water, filtered 0.45-µm filter, chill 
Colorimetry, Salicy-
late-Hypochlorite, 
Automated-Segment-ed 
Flow 
Fishman, 1993 0.02 mg/L NWQL 
Nitrite as N, water, 
filtered 0.45-µm filter, chill 
Colorimetry, Diazotiza-
tion, Auto-Segmented 
Flow 
Fishman, 1993 0.002 mg/L NWQL 
Phosphorus, as P, water, 
unfiltered 
No filtration, acidify to 
pH <2 with 1 mL 4.5 
normality H2SO4, chill 
Semiautomated 
colorimetry 
US EPA, 1993 
Method 365.1 0.008 mg/L NWQL 
Orthophosphate as P, 
water, filtered 0.45-µm filter, chill 
Colorimetry, phospho-
molybdate, automat-ed-
segmented flow 
Fishman, 1993 0.008 mg/L NWQL 
 
22 
 
Quality-control samples for discrete water quality were collected throughout the study 
period. Two blank samples and two replicate samples were collected for nutrients, and four 
replicate samples were collected for suspended sediment at various sites and on different 
sampling dates. Quality-control samples were collected and processed concurrently with 
environmental samples to assess potential bias and variability associated with sample collection, 
handling, storage, shipping, and analysis (Mueller and others, 2015). All blank results were 
below applicable detection limits, and all replicate results were within acceptable relative percent 
differences, indicating that no bias or variability were introduced by the sampling and analysis 
processes. 
 
Figure 4. Discharge hydrographs for the post-remediation study period and discrete sampling times for 
the Yellow River sites at Plymouth, Oak Grove, and Knox, northwest Indiana. 
23 
 
Statistical Methods 
Statistical methods used in this descriptive analysis included Generalized Least Squares 
(GLS) regression and Linear Mixed-Effects (LME) models. Discharge and water-quality data 
were transformed using the natural logarithm prior to analysis to satisfy assumptions of 
normality and homoscedasticity. GLS models are well-suited for datasets where the residuals are 
serially correlated, such as continuous time-series data. For this study, continuous time-series 
data included high-frequency turbidity and discharge measurements. To address the strong serial 
correlation inherent in continuous datasets, GLS models used the nlme package (Pinheiro and 
others, 2023). Rather than assigning a single correlation structure to all data, multiple candidate 
structures, including first- and second-order autoregressive (AR(1), AR(2)) and autoregressive 
moving average (ARMA), were evaluated. The final structure for each model was selected based 
on the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and evaluation of residual diagnostics. 
Conversely, LME models were used to analyze discrete water-quality samples collected 
repeatedly at the same sites over time. LME models used the lme4 package (Bates and others, 
2015), with degrees of freedom and p-values calculated using Satterthwaite’s approximation in 
the lmerTest package (Kuznetsova and others, 2017). These models included both fixed effects 
representing factors of primary management interest and random effects accounting for 
dependence among repeated or grouped observations. Sampling date was included as a random 
effect to account for these repeated measurements, providing unbiased estimates of fixed effects 
on concentration and flux. Tables 5 and 6 specify the model parameters used in each analysis. 
All statistical analyses were conducted in R (R Core Team, 2024). Post hoc comparison 
tests were performed using the emmeans() and emtrends() functions in the emmeans 
24 
 
package (Lenth, 2025). To aid interpretation, marginal means and slopes were calculated, and the 
resulting Estimated Marginal Means (EMMs) and pairwise comparisons were back-transformed 
from the log scale to the original observation units for reporting. 
General Statistical Approach 
Statistical tests were organized to address the two primary study questions (tables 5 and 6). 
Question 1: Did water quality differ before and after remediation? 
• 1a. GLS models were used to compare turbidity- discharge relations to determine 
differences in turbidity- discharge slope and turbidity values between periods at Oak 
Grove (R) and Knox (D). 
• 1b. GLS models were used to compare discharge between periods at Oak Grove (R) and 
Knox (D). 
• 1c. LME models were used to compare discrete suspended-sediment concentrations 
between periods at Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D). 
Research Question 2: Did water quality differ among sites after remediation? 
• 2a. GLS models were used to compare the turbidity- discharge relations to determine 
differences in turbidity- discharge slope and turbidity values between periods among sites 
at Plymouth (U), Oak Grove (R), and Knox (D). 
• 2b. GLS models were used to compare discharge at Plymouth (U), Oak Grove (R), and 
Knox (D) 
• 2c. LME models were used to compare mean nutrient and suspended-sediment 
concentrations and fluxes among Plymouth (U), Upas Rd (U), Oak Grove (R), CR1100E 
(R), and Knox (D). 
25 
 
• 2d. LME models were used to evaluate upstream-to-downstream monotonic trends in 
nutrient and suspended-sediment concentrations and fluxes at Plymouth (U), Upas Rd 
(U), Oak Grove (R), CR1100E (R), and Knox (D). 
Comparison of Water Quality Before and After Remediation 
GLS models were used to evaluate whether turbidity- discharge relations differed 
between the pre‑ and post‑remediation periods at Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) (table 5, test 1a). 
Models were defined with daily mean turbidity as the response variable, daily mean discharge as 
a continuous covariate, and remediation period (before and after) as a fixed effect. A discharge-
by-period interaction term was included to test whether slopes differed between periods 
(p<0.05). Pairwise t-tests of the resulting EMMs were used to assess differences in mean 
turbidity between periods while holding discharge constant at its mean value, and differences in 
marginal slopes between periods were evaluated using linear contrasts. 
Table 5. Statistical tests used to address the research question, “Did water quality differ before and after 
remediation?” for the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
 
[R, R Core Team, 2024; GLS, generalized least square; LME, linear mixed effects; ARMA, Autoregressive moving average; p, order of 
the autoregressive component; q, order of the moving-average component; ~, separates the response variable from explanatory variables; 
+, additive effects; *, main effects and their interaction; (1|month), random intercept for month; day_num, sequential daily time index; 
week_num, sequential weekly time index; —, none] 
Test 
Specific 
Research 
Question 
Statistical 
Test Type 
Response 
Variable a 
Fixed 
Effectsb 
Random 
Effects 
Correlation 
Structure Sites General Model 
Form in R 
1a 
Did the 
turbidity-
discharge 
relations differ 
between periods? 
GLS 
regression 
Mean daily 
turbidity 
Period, 
Discharge, 
Period × 
Discharge 
— ARMA(1,1) 
Oak 
Grove, 
Knoxc 
Turbidity ~ 
Period*Discharge, 
correlation = 
corARMA(form = 
~day_num, p = 1, q 
= 1) 
1b 
Did discharge 
differ between 
periods? 
GLS 
regression 
Mean weekly 
discharge Period — ARMA(4,0) 
Oak 
Grove, 
Knox 
Discharge ~ Period, 
correlation = 
corARMA(form = ~ 
week_num, p = 4, q 
= 0) 
26 
 
1c 
Did suspended-
sediment 
concentration 
differ between 
periods? 
LME 
regression 
Suspended-
sediment 
concentration 
Period, 
Discharge Month — 
Oak 
Grove, 
Knox 
Suspended Sediment 
Concentration ~ 
Period + Discharge 
+ (1 | month) 
a Response variables were transformed using the natural logarithm. 
b Period and discharge were included as fixed effects where indicated; Period x Discharge represents the interaction between period and 
discharge 
c Oak Grove and Knox analyzed separately for test 1a. 
To contextualize the turbidity results, GLS models were also used to test whether mean 
discharge differed between periods (table 5, test 1b). Models were defined with weekly mean 
discharge as the response variable and remediation period as a fixed effect. Weekly averages 
were used at both sites to ensure statistical robustness across the available period of record. 
LME models were used to determine whether discrete suspended-sediment 
concentrations differed significantly between periods at Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) (table 5, 
test 1c). These LME models were defined with suspended-sediment concentration as the 
response variable, discharge as a continuous covariate to flow-normalize the data, and 
remediation period as the primary fixed effect. 
Comparison of Water Quality Among Sites After Remediation 
GLS models were used to compare turbidity- discharge relations among Plymouth (U), 
Oak Grove (R), and Knox (D) during the post-remediation period (table 6, test 2a). Models 
defined daily mean turbidity as the response variable, daily mean discharge as a continuous 
covariate, and site as a fixed effect. A discharge-by-site interaction term was included to test 
whether turbidity-discharge slopes differed among sites (p<0.05). Post hoc comparisons were 
used to evaluate differences in estimated mean turbidity and marginal slopes among sites. GLS 
models were also used to evaluate whether daily mean discharge differed among Plymouth (U), 
27 
 
Oak Grove (R), and Knox (D) during the post-remediation period, with site included as the fixed 
effect (table 6, test 2b). 
LME models were used to assess whether discrete concentrations and fluxes of 
suspended sediment, total nitrogen, nitrate plus nitrite, nitrite, total ammonia, total phosphorus, 
and orthophosphate differed among Plymouth (U), Upas Rd (U), Oak Grove (R), CR1100E (R), 
and Knox (D) (table 6, test 2c). For models evaluating concentration, discharge was included as a 
covariate to flow-normalize the data. For models evaluating flux, season (winter, spring, 
summer, and fall) replaced discharge to account for seasonal hydrologic variability. Site was 
included as the primary fixed effect in all concentration and flux models. 
 
28 
 
Table 6. Statistical tests used to address the research question, "Did water quality differ among sites after 
remediation?" for the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. Site short names are defined in table 1. 
 
[R, R Core Team, 2024; GLS, generalized least square; LME, linear mixed effects; —, none; ARMA, autoregressive moving average; AR(1), first 
order autoregressive; p, order of the autoregressive component; q, order of the moving-average component; ~, separates the response variable from 
explanatory variables; +, additive effects; *, main effects and their interaction; (1|date), random intercept of sampling date; datenum, sequential 
daily time index; weeknum, sequential weekly time index; site_num, ordered numeric variable representing sites from upstream to downstream; —, 
none] 
Test Specific Research 
Question 
Statistical 
Test Type Sites Response 
Variable a 
Fixed 
Effects 
Random 
Effects 
Correlation 
Structure 
General Model 
Form in R 
2a 
Did the turbidity-
discharge relations differ 
among Plymouth, Oak 
Grove, and Knox post-
remediation? 
GLS model 
Plymouth, 
Oak 
Grove, 
Knox 
Daily mean 
turbidity 
Site, 
Discharge, 
Site × 
Discharge 
— ARMA(1,1) 
Turbidity ~ 
Site*Discharge, 
correlation = 
corARMA(form = ~ 
date_num, p = 1, q 
= 1) 
2b 
Did discharge differ 
among Plymouth, Oak 
Grove, and Knox in 
post-remediation? 
GLS model 
Plymouth, 
Oak 
Grove, 
Knox 
Weekly 
mean 
discharge 
Site — AR(1) 
Discharge ~ Site, 
correlation = 
corAR1(form = ~ 
week_num) 
2c 
Did the means of 
water-quality parameters 
differ among sites? 
LME 
model 
Plymouth, 
Upas Rd, 
Oak 
Grove, 
CR1100E, 
Knox 
Multiple 
parametersb Site (factor) Sampling 
Date — Response ~ Site + 
(1 | date) 
2d 
Was there a monotonic 
upstream-to-downstream 
trend in water quality? 
LME 
model 
Plymouth, 
Upas Rd, 
Oak 
Grove, 
CR1100E, 
Knox 
Multiple 
parametersb 
Site 
position 
(ordered 
numeric)c 
Sampling 
Date — 
Response ~ 
Site_num + (1 | 
date) 
a Response variables were transformed using the natural logarithm. 
b Parameters include concentrations and fluxes of suspended sediment, total nitrogen (as N), nitrite+nitrate (as N), total ammonia (as N), nitrite (as 
N), phosphorus (as P), orthophosphate (as P), and discharge. 
c Site position was represented as an ordered numeric variable increasing from upstream to downstream to test for a monotonic longitudinal trend 
Log‑likelihood ratio tests (LRTs) were used to compare full models (including site) to 
null models (excluding site) to evaluate the overall significance of the site effect (p<0.05). These 
tests were conducted using maximum likelihood (ML) estimation to allow for direct comparison 
of models with differing fixed effects. All models were then fit using Restricted Maximum 
Likelihood (REML) to obtain unbiased variance estimates and generate the final EMMs used for 
pairwise comparisons among sites. 
Separate LME models were used to evaluate whether concentrations and fluxes exhibited 
a monotonic upstream‑to‑downstream trend during the post-remediation period (table 6, test 2d). 
Sites were assigned ordered numeric values from 1 for Plymouth (U), the most upstream site, to 
29 
 
5 for Knox (D), the most downstream site. Concentration models were flow-normalized using 
discharge as a covariate, while flux models included season to control for seasonal hydrologic 
variability. Site order was included as the fixed effect in all models. LRTs were used to compare 
full and null models to determine whether the linear effect of site order was significant (p<0.05). 
A significant model slope indicated whether the upstream-to-downstream monotonic trend was 
increasing (positive slope) or decreasing (negative slope). 
Results and Discussion 
The effects of remediation efforts in the Yellow River were evaluated by addressing two 
overarching questions: (1) Did water quality differ before and after remediation? and (2) Did 
water quality differ among sites after remediation? Results of the statistical tests are presented in 
tables 7 –11, and additional statistical output summaries are provided in Appendix 1.1 –1.5. 
 Did water quality differ before and after remediation? 
Comparison of turbidity- discharge relations before and after remediation (test 1a) 
indicated significantly lower turbidity at a given discharge during the post-remediation period at 
both Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) (fig. 5; table 7). In contrast, comparisons of overall mean 
daily discharge (test 1b), mean daily turbidity (test 1a), and suspended-sediment concentrations 
(test 1c) showed that none of these metrics were different between periods at either site (fig. 6; 
table 7). 
These findings indicate that turbidity was less responsive to changes in discharge after 
remediation at both Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) (test 1a), suggesting that remediation efforts 
may have influenced turbidity dynamics at sites located within and downstream from the 
remediated reach. A previous study of restored agricultural ditches in Indiana and Ohio also 
30 
 
found lower turbidity in restored reaches compared to upstream, channelized controls (Mahl and 
others, 2015). Similarly, work in experimental watersheds in New Zealand showed that riparian 
restoration reduced in-stream turbidity (Collins and others, 2013). A USGS study in New York 
also documented reductions in suspended-sediment concentrations following implementation of 
sediment and turbidity reduction projects (STRPs), such as floodplain reconnection and hillslope 
stabilization (Siemion and others, 2016). Although the Yellow River data indicate initial changes 
in turbidity-discharge relations after remediation, additional post-remediation data could help 
determine whether these changes persist over time and whether longer-term changes in mean 
turbidity and suspended-sediment concentrations become evident. 
 
31 
 
Figure 5. Discrete sample data plotted for the turbidity (T) to discharge (Q) relationship at (a) Oak 
Grove and (b) Knox, with generalized least squares regression model lines for the pre-remediation and 
post-remediation periods. 
 
Figure 6. Boxplots showing the data for (A-B), daily mean discharge; (C-D), daily mean turbidity; and (E-
F), discrete suspended-sediment concentrations before and after remediation at Oak Grove and 
Knox. Boxplots show the distribution and median of the observed data. Diamonds represent estimated 
marginal means for each variable as a result of statistical tests; generalized least square 
regression for discharge and turbidity and linear mixed-effects regression for suspended-sediment 
concentrations. 
32 
 
Table 7. Results of comparisons of turbidity-discharge slopes and estimated marginal means for 
discharge, turbidity, and suspended-sediment concentrations at two Yellow River sites in northwest Indiana 
before and after remediation. 
[<, less than; FNU, Formazin Nephelometric Units, Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey, 2025. Tests described in table 5] 
Test Response 
Variable 
Site 
Oak Grove Knox 
Before 
Remediation 
After 
Remediation 
p - 
value 
Significant 
Difference? 
Before 
Remediation 
After 
Remediation 
p-
value 
Significant 
Difference? 
1a 
Turbidity-
discharge 
slope 
1.55 1.15 <0.001 Yes 1.96 1.53 <0.001 Yes 
1a Turbidity, in 
FNU 8.96 7.92 0.30 No 10.90 11.40 0.78 No 
1b 
Discharge, in 
cubic feet per 
second 
225 287 0.52 No 294 338 0.70 No 
1c 
Suspended-
sediment 
concentration, 
in milligrams 
per liter 
26.2 26.0 0.97 No 34.70 40.50 0.42 No 
 
Did water quality differ among sites after remediation? 
Comparison of turbidity- discharge relations among sites during the post-remediation 
period (test 2a) indicated that slopes at Plymouth (U) and Oak Grove (R) were similar to Knox 
(D), whereas the slope at Oak Grove (R) was significantly steeper than at Plymouth(U) (fig. 7C; 
table 8). Comparison of discharge among sites post-remediation (test 2b) indicated that estimated 
mean weekly discharge did not differ significantly among the three sites (fig. 7A; table 8). In 
contrast, estimated mean daily turbidity was significantly lower at Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) 
than at Plymouth (U) (fig. 7B, table 8). 
 
 
33 
 
 
Figure 7. Differences in discharge, turbidity, and turbidity- discharge relations at Plymouth, Oak Grove, 
and Knox during the post-remediation period of the Yellow River remediation study, northwest Indiana. 
(A) mean weekly discharge; (B) mean daily turbidity; (C) relation between mean daily turbidity 
and mean daily discharge. For A and B, discrete sample data are used for depicted boxplots, 
34 
 
and diamonds represent estimated marginal means from generalized least-squares models. Lower case 
letters, a and b, above boxplots indicate statistically significant differences (p<0.05) between groups. For C, 
discrete sample data is overlain by generalized least squares regression lines for each site. 
Table 8. Comparison of turbidity- discharge slopes, mean daily turbidity, and mean daily discharge 
among three sites (Plymouth, Oak Grove, and Knox) on the Yellow River during the post-remediation 
period. Estimates and standard errors, as well as significant differences among sites found using post hoc 
pairwise comparison tests are presented. Sites with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are 
indicated by different lowercase letters. 
[+/-, plus or minus; a, b, significantly different group; FNU, Formazin Nephelometric Units. Site short names are 
defined in table 1. Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey, 2025. Tests described in table 6] 
Test Response Variable Estimates by site 
Plymouth Oak Grove Knox 
Test 
2a 
Turbidity-discharge relation, 
Slope estimate 
1.41 a 
(+/- 0.09) 
1.75 b 
(+/- 0.09) 
1.69 ab 
(+/- 0.10) 
Test 
2a Mean daily turbidity, in FNU 20.68 a 
(+/- 4.74) 
9.08 b 
(+/- 1.90) 
7.86 b 
(+/- 1.63) 
Test 
2b 
Mean weekly discharge, in cubic 
feet per second 
188 a 
(+/- 78) 
287 a 
(+/- 119) 
360 a 
(+/- 150) 
 
Post-remediation comparisons of turbidity- discharge relations indicated that turbidity at 
Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D) was more responsive to changes in discharge than at Plymouth (U) 
(test 2a). At first, this result may initially appear inconsistent with turbidity-discharge 
comparisons from the before-after analysis described above (test 1a); however, it is important to 
note that before-after results capture long-term patterns in water-quality response following 
remediation at Oak Grove (R) and Knox (D), while post-remediation results provide only a 
snapshot comparison of site-level water-quality differences among sites upstream, within, and 
downstream of remediation. The finding that mean turbidity was lower at Oak Grove (R) and 
Knox (D) compared to Plymouth (U) post remediation (test 2a) is consistent with improved 
water clarity within and downstream of the remediation reach. 
Turbidity is frequently used to assess spatial and temporal patterns in water quality. For 
example, Schlosser and Karr (1981) found higher turbidity in stream sites near highly erosive 
35 
 
areas, and Jabbar and Grote (2019) reported seasonal differences in turbidity due to spring runoff 
in an agricultural watershed. Others have demonstrated that turbidity responds to both in-stream 
and watershed-scale changes. Shields and others (2009) noted the influence of channel incision 
on turbidity in an urban stream while Davis and others (2015) and Mahl and others (2015) found 
that floodplain restoration via two-stage ditch construction reduced turbidity in agricultural 
streams relative to channelized reaches. At the landscape scale, researchers have found that 
turbidity increases with agricultural land use in watersheds (Galbraith and Burns, 2006; 
Gunawardana and MacDonald, 2024), though management changes like planting cover crops at 
the watershed-scale have also been shown to reduce turbidity, particularly during high-
precipitation events (Trentman and others, 2022). These studies demonstrate the utility of 
turbidity as an integrative measure of spatial and temporal changes in stream water quality and 
lend support to the interpretation that results here indicate initial improvements in water-quality 
in the Yellow River following streambank remediation. 
Comparison of mean concentrations among sites during the post-remediation period 
indicated differences in several water-quality constituents (test 2c; fig. 8, table 9). Discharge 
was greatest at Knox (D), intermediate at CR1100E (R), Oak Grove (R), and Upas Rd (U), and 
lowest at Plymouth (U) (fig. 8A). Mean suspended-sediment concentration was numerically 
lower at all sites downstream from Plymouth (U), but the difference was statistically significant 
only at Oak Grove (R) (fig. 8B). Mean concentrations of total nitrogen (fig. 8C), nitrate plus 
nitrite (fig. 8D), ammonia (fig. 8F), and total phosphorus (fig. 8G) were lowest at Knox (D), 
intermediate at Upas (U), Oak Grove (R), and CR1100E (R), and greatest at Plymouth (U) (fig. 
8A). Mean nitrite concentrations were significantly lower at all sites than at Plymouth (U) (fig. 
36 
 
8E), whereas mean orthophosphate concentrations were lowest at Knox (D) and similar among 
the other sites (fig 8H). 
 
Figure 8. Boxplots of discrete measurements of A, discharge; B, suspended sediment; C, total 
nitrogen; D, nitrate plus nitrite; E, nitrite; F, ammonia; G, phosphorus; H, orthophosphate along Yellow 
River at Plymouth, Upas Rd, Oak Grove, CR1100E, and Knox during the post-remediation 
period. Diamonds represent estimated marginal means from linear mixed-effects models. Groups with 
statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase letters. 
 
37 
 
 
Table 9. Estimated marginal mean discharge and concentrations of suspended sediment and nutrients 
measured in discrete water-quality samples collected at five sites along the Yellow River, northwest Indiana 
during the post-remediation period. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate differences in mean 
concentrations among sites. Groups with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by 
different lowercase letters. 
[N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; CR1100E, Rd, Road; County Road 1100 East; ±, plus or minus; a, b, c, significantly 
different groups. Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey, 2025.] 
Constituent Site (Upstream to Downstream) 
Plymouth Upas Rd Oak Grove CR1100E Knox 
Discharge 
Discharge, in cubic feet per 
second 178 ± 32.8 a 260 ± 47.9 b 279 ± 51.5 b 263 ± 48.7 b 346 ± 63.8 c 
Sediment 
Suspended-sediment 
concentration, in milligrams 
per liter 
41.8 ± 7.50 a 31.0 ± 4.83 ab 27.2 ± 4.15 b 31.0 ± 4.85 ab 30.3 ± 4.43 ab 
Nitrogen 
Total nitrogen as N, in 
milligrams per liter 6.38 ± 0.57 a 5.59 ± 0.47 b 5.44 ± 0.46 b 5.51 ± 0.46 b 4.29 ± 0.35 c 
Nitrate + nitrite as N, in 
milligrams per liter 5.17 ± 0.47 a 4.64 ± 0.40 b 4.54 ± 0.39 b 4.61 ± 0.40 b 3.51 ± 0.30 c 
Nitrite as N, in milligrams 
per liter 0.03 ± 0.01 a 0.02 ± 0.00 b 0.02 ± 0.00 b 0.02 ± 0.00 b 0.02 ± 0.00 b 
Total ammonia as N, in 
milligrams per liter 0.05 ± 0.01 a 0.04 ± 0.01 b 0.03 ± 0.01 bc 0.03 ± 0.01 bc 0.03 ± 0.00 c 
Phosphorus 
Total phosphorus as P, in 
milligrams per liter 0.15 ± 0.02 a 0.12 ± 0.01 b 0.12 ± 0.01 b 0.11 ± 0.01 b 0.09 ± 0.01 c 
Orthophosphate as P, in 
milligrams per liter 0.06 ± 0.01 a 0.06 ± 0.01 a 0.05 ± 0.01 a 0.05 ± 0.01 a 0.04 ± 0.01 b 
 
 Flux incorporates both constituent concentration and stream discharge to quantify the 
mass of a constituent transported past a location over a specified period. Because flux accounts 
for the volume of water moving through the system, it provides a meaningful basis for 
comparing upstream and downstream conditions and evaluating how loads change across a 
watershed. Comparisons of mean constituent fluxes among sites (test 2c) also indicated 
significant differences (fig. 9; table 10), although flux patterns differed from concentration 
patterns. For example, mean suspended-sediment flux was significantly greater at Knox (D) than 
all other sites (fig. 9A). Mean flux of total nitrogen (fig. 9B), nitrate plus nitrite (fig. 9C), nitrite 
38 
 
(fig. 9D), total phosphorus (fig. 9F), and orthophosphate (fig. 9G) were similar at Knox (D), 
CR1100E (R), Oak Grove (R), and Upas Rd (U) and were significantly greater at those sites than 
at Plymouth (U). Mean ammonia flux did not differ significantly among sites (fig. 9E). 
 
Figure 9. Boxplots of instantaneous flux calculated from discrete sample results for A, suspended 
sediment; B, total nitrogen; C, nitrate plus nitrite; D, nitrite; E, ammonia; F, phosphorus; and G, 
orthophosphate along Yellow River at Plymouth, Upas Rd, Oak Grove, CR1100E, and Knox during the 
post-remediation period. Diamonds represent estimated marginal means from linear mixed-effects 
models. Groups with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase 
letters. 
39 
 
Table 10. Estimated marginal mean instantaneous fluxes of suspended sediment and nutrients measured 
in discrete water-quality samples collected at five sites along the Yellow River, northwest Indiana during the 
post-remediation period. Linear mixed-effects models were used to evaluate differences in mean loads 
among sites. Sites with statistically significant differences (p<0.05) are indicated by different lowercase 
letters. 
[N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; Rd, Road; CR1100E, County Road 1100 East; ±, plus or minus; a, b, c, significantly different groups. Site 
short names from table 1. Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey 2025.] 
Instantaneous 
constituent flux, in 
kilograms per hour 
Site (Upstream to Downstream) 
Plymouth Upas Rd Oak Grove CR1100E Knox 
Sediment 
Suspended sediment 419 ± 159 a 586 ± 222 a 578 ± 219 a 599 ± 228 a 925 ± 351 b 
Nitrogen 
Total nitrogen as N 91.2 ± 22.4 a 128 ± 31.6 b 137 ± 33.6 b 129 ± 31.8 b 141 ± 34.8 b 
Nitrate + nitrite as N 75.2 ± 17.6 a 108 ± 25.3 b 115 ± 27.0 b 109 ± 25.7 b 117 ± 27.3 b 
Nitrite as N 0.44 ± 0.14 a 0.48 ± 0.15 a 0.47 ± 0.15 a 0.46 ± 0.15 a 0.51 ± 0.16 a 
Total ammonia as N 0.80 ± 0.27 a 0.84 ± 0.29 a 0.86 ± 0.29 a 0.76 ± 0.26 a 0.93 ± 0.32 a 
Phosphorus 
Total phosphorus as P 1.67 ± 0.59 a 2.36 ± 0.83 b 2.45 ± 0.86 b 2.22 ± 0.78 b 2.72 ± 0.96 b 
Orthophosphate as P 0.65 ± 0.18 a 0.96 ± 0.27 b 1.03 ± 0.29 b 0.90 ± 0.26 b 1.00 ± 0.28 b 
 
These results indicate that water quality varied among sites during the post-remediation 
period. Concentration patterns reflected site-specific differences, whereas flux patterns 
highlighted the overwhelming influence of greater discharge at downstream sites. Concentrations 
of most constituents were lower at sites within and downstream from the remediated reach — 
Oak Grove (R), CR1100E (R), and Knox (D) — than at Plymouth (U) but were generally similar 
to concentrations at Upas (U). This suggests that spatial proximity may have played a larger role 
than remediation status. Plymouth (U) is approximately 18 miles upstream from the first 
remediation area, whereas Upas Rd (U) is approximately 1 mile upstream of the remediation and 
is spatially closer to Oak Grove (R) and CR1100E (R). These three spatially clustered sites also 
had generally similar mean concentrations. Similarities among nearby sites may reflect shared 
watershed characteristics such as land use, soils, and topography. It is also possible that one year 
40 
 
of data collection was insufficient to detect the influence of remediation on mean concentrations, 
even when accounting for variation in discharge. Previous synoptic sampling studies in restored 
systems have reported similar longitudinal variability in water chemistry, noting the influence of 
local land use factors and groundwater inputs (Sivirichi and others, 2011). Because flux 
integrates both concentration and discharge, greater downstream fluxes are likely driven by 
higher discharge rather than differences in water quality. 
Nevertheless, previous studies have shown that restoration can improve water quality, but 
effects can be temporally variable, site-specific, or more detectable in functional rather than 
concentration-based metrics. For example, two-stage floodplain restorations in agricultural 
streams reduced phosphorus concentrations during high-flow events (i.e., floodplain inundation), 
but the effects on sediment, nitrate, and ammonium concentrations were more variable (Davis 
and others, 2015; Mahl and others 2015). Restored reaches also have been shown to export less 
total nitrogen and phosphorus during high flows than unrestored reaches (Pennino and others, 
2016), and long-term monitoring in the Chesapeake Bay watershed documented decreases in 
nitrate concentrations over a decade following restoration (Mayer and others, 2022). Numerous 
studies further demonstrate that restoration improves functional metrics such as nutrient uptake 
or retention, ultimately reducing downstream export (Sivirichi and others, 2011; Filoso and 
Palmer, 2011; Newcomer Johnson and others, 2016). Future research in the Yellow River could 
incorporate targeted storm sampling and functional metrics to more fully evaluate the effects of 
remediation on water quality. 
Finally, examining monotonic trends in mean concentration and flux (test 2d) revealed 
upstream-to-downstream patterns for some water-quality parameters during the post-remediation 
period (table 11). Mean concentration of total nitrogen, nitrate, nitrite, ammonia, total 
41 
 
phosphorus, and orthophosphate decreased from upstream to downstream (table 11), whereas 
mean suspended-sediment concentration showed no monotonic trend. In contrast, mean fluxes of 
suspended sediment, total nitrogen, nitrate, total phosphorus, and orthophosphate increased from 
upstream to downstream (table 11), whereas mean nitrite and ammonia fluxes showed no 
significant trend. 
These findings show contrasting longitudinal patterns between concentration and flux 
metrics. Nutrient concentrations decreased from upstream to downstream, whereas suspended 
sediment did not. Concentration models accounted for discharge, thus these longitudinal declines 
in nutrients, but not sediment, likely reflect mechanisms beyond simple dilution as water moves 
downstream, such as in-stream processing or localized remediation effects. In contrast, nutrient 
and sediment fluxes increased longitudinally, a pattern best explained by hydrologic scaling 
which is when larger volumes of flow downstream lead to greater mass export despite lower 
concentrations. Similar dynamics have been documented in restored systems, where nitrogen 
concentrations decreased downstream while flux increased (Filoso and Palmer, 2011). 
Collectively, the Yellow River results suggest that remediation may be effective at reducing 
concentrations locally, but increasing discharge downstream continues to drive nutrient and 
sediment fluxes. This highlights how evaluating restoration performance using concentration- 
and flux-based metrics and longitudinal trends within the stream can be used to evaluate 
potential benefits despite discontinuous remediation. 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
Table 11. Fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed-effect models evaluating the direction and significance 
of upstream-to-downstream trends in post-remediation sediment and nutrient concentrations and fluxes in 
the Yellow River, northwest Indiana. 
[ N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; <, less than; Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey, 2025.] 
Constituent Estimate Standard Error p-
value Significant? Trend Direction 
Discharge, in cubic feet per second 
Discharge 0.13 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
Concentration, in milligrams per liter 
Suspended sediment -0.05 0.03 0.09 No No trend 
Total nitrogen as N -0.07 0.01 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Nitrate + nitrite as N -0.07 0.01 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Nitrite as N -0.07 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Total ammonia as N -0.11 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Total phosphorus as P -0.09 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Orthophosphate as P -0.10 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Decreasing downstream 
Flux, in kilograms per hour 
Suspended sediment 0.16 0.03 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
Total nitrogen as N 0.09 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
Nitrate + nitrite as N 0.09 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
Nitrite as N 0.03 0.02 0.09 No No trend 
Total ammonia as N 0.02 0.02 0.34 No No trend 
Total phosphorus as P 0.09 0.02 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
Orthophosphate as P 0.08 0.03 < 0.01 Yes Increasing downstream 
 
Limitations and Considerations 
Data collection along the Yellow River was expanded in February 2024 to support 
longitudinal analysis of remediation effects. However, comparisons between pre- and post-
remediation conditions were limited to one site within the remediated reach and one site 
downstream from remediation. Pre-remediation data were not available at the upstream control 
site for turbidity, discharge, or suspended-sediment concentration, preventing comparison of 
43 
 
temporal changes among sites upstream from, within, and downstream from the remediated 
reach. Nutrient data also were limited to discrete samples collected in 2024, with no pre-
remediation baseline, available for evaluating changes over time. 
Sites where data was collected only post-remediation were chosen to encompass the 
immediate effect of remediation in terms of proximity to the remediation reach. Upas Rd (U), the 
site just upstream of remediation, and sites within the remediation reach, Oak Grove (R) and 
CR1100E (R), showed similar concentration and flux results. Remediation projects in the study 
area were completed between 2021 and 2023, and their full effects may not yet be realized. Other 
restoration studies (Siemion and others, 2016; Collins and others, 2013) have found that bank 
remediation effects become more pronounced as the restored riparian zones mature over time. 
Continued data collection could improve the ability to evaluate sediment and nutrient transport 
and determine whether longer-term changes become evident. 
Summary 
The U.S. Geological Survey, in cooperation with the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow 
River Basin Development Commission, evaluated the potential effects of streambank 
remediation along portions of the Yellow River in northwest Indiana. Two phases of remediation 
were completed between 2021 and 2023, and potential effects were evaluated through temporal 
and spatial comparisons. For the temporal analysis, two periods were defined: a pre‑remediation 
period (April 2019 – August 2021) and a post‑remediation period (February – October 2024). 
Continuous discharge, continuous turbidity, and discrete suspended‑sediment data were available 
at two long‑term monitoring sites—USGS 05516665 Yellow River near Oak Grove, IN (Oak 
Grove) and USGS 05517000 Yellow River at Knox, IN (Knox). These data were used to 
44 
 
evaluate changes in streamflow, turbidity, and suspended-sediment dynamics before and after 
remediation. 
For the spatial analysis, continuous water‑quality monitoring was expanded in February 
2024 to include USGS 05516500 Yellow River at Plymouth, IN (Plymouth), where turbidity 
monitoring was added to the existing streamflow gage. In addition to the three 
continuous‑monitoring sites at Plymouth, Oak Grove, and Knox, two supplemental sites located 
upstream of and within the remediation reach—USGS 05516663 Yellow River at Upas Road 
near Oak Grove, IN (Upas Rd) and USGS 05516667 Yellow River at CR1100E near Oak Grove, 
IN (CR1100E)—were sampled during the post-remediation period for suspended sediment and 
dissolved and total forms of nitrogen and phosphorus. 
Statistical analysis in this study consisted of generalized least-squares and/or linear 
mixed-effects regression models, depending on the structure of the data. To address whether 
water quality differed after remediation (temporally), changes were analyzed in turbidity- 
discharge relations, and turbidity, discharge, and suspended-sediment concentrations between the 
pre- and post- remediation periods. Spatial differences during the post-remediation period were 
evaluated from upstream to downstream using turbidity, discharge, suspended-sediment 
concentrations and fluxes, and nutrient concentrations and fluxes. 
Temporal comparisons at Oak Grove (R - within remediation), and Knox (D - 
downstream of remediation) showed that turbidity increased less with increasing discharge, 
indicating that water clarity during larger flow events improved after remediation compared to 
before remediation. Mean turbidity and mean suspended-sediment concentrations, however, did 
not show significant differences between remediation periods. These results suggest initial 
45 
 
improvements in turbidity-discharge relation, although additional long-term monitoring could 
help determine whether these changes persist or strengthen over time. 
Upstream to downstream comparisons after remediation showed that turbidity -discharge 
relations had steeper slopes at downstream sites relative to the upstream control site, Plymouth 
(U), meaning turbidity increased more rapidly with discharge downstream. Oak Grove (R) and 
Knox (D) exhibited similar slopes, indicating comparable turbidity responses to changing flow 
conditions at these downstream locations. Despite stronger turbidity response to discharge, 
downstream sites within and downstream of remediation had statistically lower mean turbidity, 
further suggesting improved water clarity related to remediation. Nutrient concentrations 
generally decreased from upstream to downstream, whereas suspended-sediment concentration 
showed some decrease but with no consistent upstream to downstream trend. In contrast, fluxes 
of suspended sediment and nutrient constituents increased downstream, likely driven by greater 
discharge volumes. 
This study was limited by the availability of pre-remediation data only at sites within and 
downstream from the remediated reach. Without pre-remediation data from an upstream control 
site, the observed temporal and spatial patterns could not be fully attributed to remediation. The 
lack of pre-remediation baseline data also prevented before-and-after analysis at the most 
upstream site, Plymouth (U). Because the remediation efforts evaluated in this study were 
completed only one season before monitoring was expanded, some responses may not yet have 
been fully expressed as observed in other restoration studies (Siemion and others, 2016; Collins 
and others, 2013). Continued monitoring could improve the ability to evaluate longer-term 
effects of remediation on water quality in the Yellow River. 
 
46 
 
References Cited 
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S., 2015, Fitting linear mixed‑effects models 
using lme4: Journal of Statistical Software, v. 67, no. 1, p. 1–48, accessed January 27, 
2026, from https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01. 
Christopher B. Burke Engineering, LLC, 2019, Kankakee River Flood and Sediment 
Management Work Plan. Report prepared for the Kankakee River Basin and Yellow 
River Basin Development Commission, Valparaiso, IN. Retrieved March 20, 2025, from 
https://kankakeeandyellowrivers.org/2019-workplan.pdf. 
Collins, K.E., Doscher, C., Rennie, H.G. and Ross, J.G., 2013, The effectiveness of riparian 
‘restoration’ on water quality—a case study of lowland streams in Canterbury, New 
Zealand. Restoration Ecology, 21(1), pp.40-48. [Also available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-100X.2011.00859.x] 
Davis, R.T., Tank, J.L., Mahl, U.H., Winikoff, S.G., and Roley, S.S., 2015, The influence of 
two-stage ditches with constructed floodplains on water column and sediments in 
agricultural streams. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 51(4): 941-
955. [Also available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/1752-1688.12341]. 
Demissie, M., Getahun, E. and Keefer, L., 2016, The Sediment Budget of the Illinois River: 
1981-2015. Report of Investigation (Illinois State Water Survey) RI-122. Accessed June 
25, 2025, at https://www.isws.illinois.edu/pubdoc/RI/ISWSRI-122.pdf. 
Downhour, C.R., and Piotrowski, D.R., 2025, Model archive summary and suspended-sediment 
concentrations from a surrogate ordinary least square regression analysis for station 
47 
 
05517500, Kankakee River at Dunns Bridge, Indiana, April 2016 through July 2020: U.S. 
Geological Survey data release, [Also available at: https://doi.org/10.5066/P90R7T0E.] 
Fenelon, J.M., Bobay, K., Greeman, T.K., Hoover, M.E., Cohen, D.A., Fowler, K.K., Woodfield, 
M.C., Durbin, J.M., and Doss, P.K., 1994, Hydrogeologic Atlas of Aquifers in Indiana: 
U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 92-4142, 197 p., [Also 
available at https://doi.org/10.3133/wri924142.] 
Fishman, M.J., ed., 1993, Methods of analysis by the U.S. Geological Survey National Water 
Quality Laboratory—Determination of inorganic and organic constituents in water and 
fluvial sediments: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 93–125, 217 p. [Also 
available at https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr93125.] 
Galbraith, L. M., and Burns, C. W., 2007, Linking land-use, water body type and water quality in 
southern New Zealand. Landscape Ecology, 22(2), 231-241, [Also available at 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-006-9018-x]. 
Gunawardana, C., and MacDonald, W., 2024, Impacts of land use changes on discharge and 
water quality in rivers and streams: Case study of the continental United States. Journal 
of the American Water Resources Association 60: 725-740. Accessed September 23, 
2025, at https://doi.org/10.1111/1752-1688.13198. 
Indiana Department of Environmental Management, 2017, Headwaters Yellow River Watershed 
Management Plan. accessed August 26, 2025, at 
https://www.in.gov/idem/nps/resources/watershed-management-plans/headwaters-
yellow-river-wmp-5-9/. 
48 
 
Ivens, J.L., Bhowmik, N.G., Brigham, A.R., and Gross, D.L., 1981, The Kankakee River 
yesterday and today: Illinois State Water Survey Miscellaneous Publication 60, 24 p., 
accessed July 7, 2025, at https://www.isws.illinois.edu/pubdoc/MP/ISWSMP-60.pdf. 
Jabbar, F.K., and Grote, K., 2019, Statistical assessment of nonpoint source pollution in 
agricultural watersheds in the Lower Grand River watershed, MO, USA. Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research 261: 1487-1506. Accessed September 23, 2025, at 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-3682-7. 
Kelly, W.R.; Zhang, Z.; Abrams, D. B.; Hadley, D. R.; Mannix, D. H.; Getahun, E.; Knapp, H. 
V.; Roadcap, G. S.; Meyer, S. C.; Dziegielewski, B.; Balikian, R.; Thomason, J. F., 2019, 
Water Supply Planning: Kankakee Watershed Assessment of Water Resources for Water 
Supply. accessed July 1, 2025, at https://www.ideals.illinois.edu/items/111691. 
Kennedy, E., 1984, Discharge ratings at gaging stations: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques of 
Water-Resources Investigations 03-A10, xi, 59 p., [Also available at 
https://doi.org/10.3133/twri03A10.]. 
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B., 2017, lmerTest package: Tests in 
linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13), 1–26, [Also 
available at https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v082i13.] 
Lathrop, T. R., Bunch, A. R., Downhour, M. S., 2019, Regression models for estimating 
sediment and nutrient concentrations and fluxes at the Kankakee River, Shelby, Indiana, 
December 2015 through May 2018. US Geological Survey. Accessed March 21, 2025, at 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/publication/sir20195005. 
49 
 
Lenth, R. V., 2025, emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka least-squares means (R package 
version 1.11.0), [Also available at: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=emmeans.]. 
Little Jr, C.D. and Jonas, M.M., 2013, Kankakee River basin: evaluation of sediment 
management strategies (No. ERDCCHLTR138). Accessed July 1, 2025 at 
https://usace.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p266001coll1/id/4500/. 
Mahl, U.H., Tank, J.L., Roley, S.S. and Davis, R.T., 2015, Two‐stage ditch floodplains enhance 
N‐removal capacity and reduce turbidity and dissolved P in agricultural streams. JAWRA 
Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 51(4), pp.923-940, [Also 
available at https://doi.org/10.1111/1752-1688.12340]. 
Mayer, P., Pennino, M., Newcomer Johnson, T.A., and Kaushal, S.S., 2022, Long-term 
assessment of floodplain reconnection as a stream restoration approach for managing 
nitrogen in groundwater and surface water. Urban Ecosystems 25, 879-907. Accessed 
September 23, 2025, at https://doi.org/10.1007/s11252-021-01199-z. 
Meyer, A.H., 1935, The Kankakee “Marsh” of northern Indiana and Illinois. Papers of the 
Michigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters v. 21: 359-396. Accessed September 23, 
2025, at https://doi.org/10.1111/1752-1688.12340. 
Mitsch, W.J., and Gosselink, J.G., 2000, Wetlands: Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., N.Y., 920 p. 
Newcomer Johnson, T.A., Kaushal, S.S., Mayer, P.M., Smith, R.M., and Sivirichi. G.M., 2016, 
Nutrient retention in restored streams and rivers: A global review and synthesis. Water 
8(4), 116, [Also available at https://doi.org/10.3390/w8040116.]. 
50 
 
Patton, C.J., and Kryskalla, J.R., 2003, Methods of analysis by the U.S. Geological Survey 
National Water Quality Laboratory—Evaluation of alkaline persulfate digestion as an 
alternative to Kjeldahl digestion for determination of total and dissolved nitrogen and 
phosphorus in water: U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 03–
4174, 33 p. [Also available at https://doi.org/10.3133/wri034174.]. 
Patton, C.J., and Kryskalla, J.R., 2011, Colorimetric determination of nitrate plus nitrite in water 
by enzymatic reduction, automated discrete analyzer methods: U.S. Geological Survey 
Techniques and Methods, book 5, chap. B8, 34 p. [Also available at 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/tm/05b08/.]. 
Pennino, M. J., Kaushal, S. S., Mayer, P. M., Utz, R. M., and Cooper, C. A., 2016, Stream 
restoration and sewers impact sources and fluxes of water, carbon, and nutrients in urban 
watersheds, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 20, 3419–3439, Accessed September 23, 2025, at 
https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-20-3419-2016. 
Pinheiro J, Bates D, R Core Team (2026). nlme: Linear and Nonlinear Mixed Effects Models. R 
package version 3.1-171, [Also available at https://svn.r-project.org/R-
packages/trunk/nlme/.] 
R Core Team, 2024, R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. [also available at https://www.R-project.org/.] 
Schlosser, I.J., and Karr, J.R. 1981. Riparian vegetation and channel morphology impact on 
spatial patterns of water quality in agricultural watersheds. Environmental Management 
5(3): 233-243. [Also available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01873282]. 
51 
 
Shields Jr., F.D., Lizotte Jr., R.E., Knight, S.S, Cooper, C.M., and Wilcox, D., 2009, The stream 
channel incision syndrome and water quality. Ecological Engineering 36: 78-90. 
Accessed September 23, 2025, at 10.1016/j.ecoleng.2009.09.014. 
Shreve, E.A., and Downs, A.C., 2005, Quality-assurance plan for the analysis of fluvial sediment 
by the U.S. Geological Survey Kentucky Water Science Center Sediment Laboratory 
(Online only): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2005-1230, 35 p., [Also 
available at https://doi.org/10.3133/ofr20051230.] 
Siemion, J., McHale, M.R., and Davis, W.D., 2016, Suspended-sediment and turbidity responses 
to sediment and turbidity reduction projects in the Beaver Kill, Stony Clove Creek, and 
Warner Creek Watersheds, New York, 2010–14: U.S. Geological Survey Scientific 
Investigations Report 2016–5157, 28 p., Accessed September 23, 2025, at 
https://doi.org/10.3133/sir20165157. 
Sivirichi, G.M., Kaushal, S.S., Mayer, P.M., Welty, C., Belt, K.T., Newcomer, T.A., Newcomb, 
K.D., and Grese, M.M., 2011, Longitudinal variability in streamwater chemistry and 
carbon and nitrogen fluxes in restored and degraded urban stream networks. Journal of 
Environmental Monitoring 13: 288-303. [Also available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c0em00055h]. 
Trentman, M.T., Tank, J.L., Davis, R.T., Hanrahan, B. R., Mahl, U. H., and Roley, S.S., 2022, 
Watershed-scale Land Use Change Increases Ecosystem Metabolism in an Agricultural 
Stream. Ecosystems 25, 441–456. Accessed September 28, 2025 at 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-021-00664-2. 
52 
 
Turnipseed, D.P., and Sauer, V.B., 2010, Discharge measurements at gaging stations: U.S. 
Geological Survey Techniques and Methods book 3, chap. A8, 87 p. (Also available at 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/tm/tm3-a8/.) 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA), 1993, Method365.1: Determination of 
phosphorus by semi-automated colorimetry, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Cincinnati, OH, Report Number EPA/6006R-93/100, [Also available at: 
https://hero.epa.gov/hero/index.cfm/reference/details/reference_id/87589.] 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2006, Chapter A4. Collection of water samples (Version 2.0, 
Revised September 2006 (original version published September 1999)): U.S. Geological 
Survey Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations 09-A4, 166 p., Accessed July 1, 
2025, at https://doi.org/10.3133/twri09A4. 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2019, The StreamStats program, Accessed May 2025 at 
https://streamstats.usgs.gov/ss/. 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2024, Annual NLCD Collection 1 Science Products (ver. 1.1, 
June 2025): U.S. Geological Survey data release. Accessed January 12, 2026, at 
https://doi.org/10.5066/P94UXNTS. 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), 2025, National Water Information System—Water Data for the 
Nation: U.S. Geological Survey database. Accessed August 26, 2025, at 
https://waterdata.usgs.gov/. 
53 
 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and National 
Water Quality Monitoring Council (NWQMC), 2024, Water Quality Portal. Accessed 
February 21, 2025, at https://www.waterqualitydata.us/. 
Wagner, R.J.; Boulger, R.W., Jr.; Oblinger, C.J.; and Smith, B.A., 2006, Guidelines and standard 
procedures for continuous water-quality monitors—Station operation, record 
computation, and data reporting: U.S. Geological Survey Techniques and Methods, book 
1, chap. D3, 51 p., 8 attachments. Accessed March 21, 2025, at 
https://pubs.usgs.gov/publication/tm1D3. 
YSI Inc., 2024, EXO user manual. Yellow Springs, OH, Accessed July 7, 2025, from 
https://www.ysi.com/File%20Library/Documents/Manuals/EXO-User-Manual-Web.pdf. 
 
54 
 
Appendix 1. Statistical Output Summaries 
Appendix 1.1. Statistical summary of generalized least square regression (GLS) models comparing 
turbidity-discharge relations (test 1a) and mean discharge (test 1b), as well as results from a linear mixed 
effects (LME) model comparing suspended sediment concentration, between periods before and after 
remediation in the Yellow River, Indiana. Bolded p-values denote fixed effects of interest and asterisks 
denote fixed effects of interest that were significant (p<0.05). 
 
[ FNU, Formazin Nephelometric Units, Test described in table 5. Data used in analysis available at U.S. 
Geological Survey 2025.] 
Test Response 
Variable 
Model 
Parameter 
Oak Grove Knox 
Value Standard 
Error 
p-
value Value Standard 
Error 
p-
value 
Test 
1a 
Mean daily 
turbidity, in 
FNU 
Intercept -6.76 0.24 0.00 -9.16 0.33 0.00 
Discharge 1.56 0.04 0.09 1.92 0.05 0.00 
Period 0.59 0.35 0.00 2.19 0.56 0.00 
Period x 
Discharge -0.12 0.06 0.05* -0.38 0.08 0.00* 
Test 
1b 
Mean daily 
discharge, in 
cubic feet per 
seconds 
Intercept 5.64 0.03 0.00 5.73 0.01 0.00 
Period -0.17 0.08 0.04* 0.15 0.12 0.18 
Test 
1c 
Suspended 
sediment 
concentration, 
in milligrams 
per liter 
Intercept -1.48 0.59 0.01 -3.03 0.58 0.00 
Discharge 0.81 0.10 0.00 1.09 0.09 0.00 
Period 0.09 0.21 0.67 0.00 0.20 0.99 
 
 
55 
 
Appendix 1.2. Statistical summary of generalized least square regression (GLS) models comparing 
turbidity-discharge relations (test 2a) and mean discharge (test 2b) among sites in post-remediation period. 
Bolded p-values denote fixed effects of interest and asterisks denote fixed effects of interest that were 
significant (p<0.05). 
 
[ FNU, Formazin Nephelometric Units; <, less than; Test described in table 6. 
Data used in analysis available at U.S. Geological Survey 2025.] 
Test 
Model 
Response 
Variable 
Model Parameter Value Standard 
Error 
p-
value 
Test 2aa Mean daily 
turbidity, in FNU 
Intercept -5.17 0.51 <0.001 
Discharge 1.38 0.09 <0.001 
Site:Knox -2.61 0.77 <0.001* 
Site:Oak Grove -2.45 0.74 <0.001* 
Discharge x Knox 0.28 0.12 0.02* 
Discharge x Oak 
Grove 0.27 0.12 0.02* 
Test 2b 
Mean daily 
discharge, in 
cubic feet per 
second 
Intercept 5.23 0.55 <0.001 
Site:Knox 0.67 0.77 0.38 
Site:Oak Grove 0.44 0.77 0.57 
a Coefficients for site represent differences in intercept relative to the reference site (Plymouth), while 
the interaction terms represent differences in the turbidity-discharge slope relative to the reference 
site (Plymouth). 
 
56 
 
Appendix 1.3. Site fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed effects regression models comparing mean 
water-quality concentrations among five sites on the Yellow River in the post-remediation period (test 2c). 
For each parameter, models were fit with site as a fixed effect, natural log-transformed discharge as a 
covariate, and with random effects specified as described in the Methods. Reported coefficient estimates 
represent differences in mean natural log-transformed concentration at each site relative to the reference 
site (Plymouth), adjusted for discharge and date-level random effects. Pairwise comparisons among site 
estimated marginal means (Tukey-adjusted) are presented in table 9 of the report. 
 
[N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; Rd, Road, CR1100E; County Rd 1100 
East; <, less than. Site short name from table 1. Data used in analysis 
from U.S. Geological Survey, 2025.] 
Response Variable Site Estimate Standard 
Error p-value 
Suspended sediment 
concentration, in 
milligrams per liter 
Upas Rd -0.30 0.13 0.02 
Oak Grove -0.43 0.13 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.30 0.13 0.02 
Knox -0.32 0.15 0.03 
Total Nitrogen as N, 
in milligrams per 
liter 
Upas Rd -0.13 0.03 < 0.01 
Oak Grove -0.16 0.03 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.15 0.03 < 0.01 
Knox -0.40 0.04 < 0.01 
Nitrate + nitrite as 
N, in milligrams per 
liter 
Upas Rd -0.11 0.03 < 0.01 
Oak Grove -0.13 0.03 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.11 0.03 < 0.01 
Knox -0.39 0.04 < 0.01 
Nitrite as N, in 
milligrams per liter 
Upas Rd -0.27 0.08 < 0.01 
Oak Grove -0.34 0.08 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.32 0.08 < 0.01 
Knox -0.46 0.10 < 0.01 
Total ammonia as 
N, in milligrams per 
liter 
Upas Rd -0.38 0.08 < 0.01 
Oak Grove -0.44 0.09 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.51 0.09 < 0.01 
Knox -0.62 0.10 < 0.01 
Total Phosphorus as 
P, in milligrams per 
liter 
Upas Rd -0.21 0.06 < 0.01 
Oak Grove -0.27 0.07 < 0.01 
CR1100E -0.29 0.06 < 0.01 
Knox -0.49 0.08 < 0.01 
Orthophosphate as 
P, in milligrams per 
liter 
Upas Rd -0.14 0.08 0.10 
Oak Grove -0.17 0.09 0.05 
CR1100E -0.22 0.09 0.01 
Knox -0.50 0.10 < 0.01 
a Site coefficients are relative to the reference site (Plymouth). 
Negative estimates indicate lower concentrations than the reference 
site; positive estimates indicate higher concentrations. 
b Responses were natural log-transformed prior to modeling. 
Coefficients are presented on the log scale. 
c All models included natural log-transformed discharge as a covariate; 
discharge coefficients are not shown for brevity. 
d A random intercept for sampling date was included to account for 
non-independence of repeated measurements through time. 
e Likelihood ratio tests comparing models with and without the site 
term were conducted using maximum likelihood fits; fixed-effects 
estimates shown here are from restricted maximum likelihood fits. 
 
 
57 
 
Appendix 1.4. Site fixed-effect estimates from linear mixed effects regression models comparing mean 
water-quality fluxes among five sites on the Yellow River in the post-remediation period (test 2c). For each 
parameter, models were fit with site as a fixed effect, season as a fixed effect to account for flow variability, 
and with random effects specified as described in the Methods. Reported coefficient estimates represent 
differences in mean natural log-transformed flux at each site relative to the reference site (Plymouth), 
adjusted for season and date-level random effects. Pairwise comparisons among site estimated marginal 
means (Tukey-adjusted) are presented in table 10 of the report. 
 
[N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; Rd, Road, CR1100E; County Rd 1100 East; <, 
less than. Site short names from table 1. Data used in analysis from U.S. 
Geological Survey, 2025.] 
Response Variable Site Estimate Standard 
Error 
p-
value 
Suspended sediment 
concentration, in 
kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.33 0.14 0.02 
Oak 
Grove 0.32 0.14 0.03 
CR1100E 0.36 0.15 0.02 
Knox 0.79 0.15 < 0.01 
Total Nitrogen as N, in 
kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.34 0.08 < 0.01 
Oak 
Grove 0.40 0.08 < 0.01 
CR1100E 0.35 0.08 < 0.01 
Knox 0.44 0.08 < 0.01 
Nitrate + nitrite as N, 
in kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.36 0.08 < 0.01 
Oak 
Grove 0.43 0.08 < 0.01 
CR1100E 0.37 0.08 < 0.01 
Knox 0.44 0.08 < 0.01 
Nitrite as N, in 
kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.09 0.07 0.24 
Oak 
Grove 0.08 0.07 0.30 
CR1100E 0.05 0.08 0.50 
Knox 0.16 0.08 0.03 
Total ammonia as N, 
in kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.05 0.09 0.55 
Oak 
Grove 0.08 0.09 0.37 
CR1100E -0.05 0.09 0.54 
Knox 0.15 0.09 0.10 
Total Phosphorus as P, 
in kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.34 0.09 < 0.01 
Oak 
Grove 0.38 0.09 < 0.01 
CR1100E 0.29 0.09 < 0.01 
Knox 0.49 0.09 < 0.01 
Orthophosphate as P, 
in kilograms per hour 
Upas Rd 0.39 0.11 < 0.01 
Oak 
Grove 0.46 0.11 < 0.01 
CR1100E 0.33 0.11 < 0.01 
Knox 0.43 0.11 < 0.01 
a Site coefficients are relative to the reference site (Plymouth). Negative 
estimates indicate lower flux than the reference site; positive estimates 
indicate higher flux. 
b Responses were natural log-transformed prior to modeling. Coefficients are 
presented on the log scale. 
c All models included season as a fixed effect to account for flow variability; 
season coefficients are not shown for brevity. 
d A random intercept for sampling date was included to account for non-
independence of repeated measurements through time. 
e Likelihood ratio tests comparing models with and without the site term were 
conducted using maximum likelihood fits; fixed-effects estimates shown here 
are from restricted maximum likelihood fits. 
58 
 
Appendix 1.5. Summary of statistical results from log-likelihood ratio tests between a full linear mixed 
effects (LME) model where site order was included as a fixed effect and a null LME model were site order 
was not included for sediment and nutrient concentrations and loads in the Yellow River remediation study 
in northwest Indiana. 
 
[N, nitrogen; P, phosphorus; < less than. Data used in analysis available at 
U.S. Geological Survey, 2025] 
Constituent Chi-square p-value 
Discharge, in cubic feet per second 
Discharge 26.6 <0.01 
Concentration, in milligrams per liter 
Suspended Sediment 2.82 0.093 
Total Nitrogen as N 44.0 <0.01 
Nitrate + Nitrite as N 43.0 <0.01 
Nitrite as N 12.7 <0.01 
Total Ammonia as N 22.8 <0.01 
Total Phosphorus as P 26.8 <0.01 
Orthophosphate as P 21.3 <0.01 
Flux, in kilograms per hour 
Suspended Sediment 20.7 <0.01 
Total Nitrogen as N 20.5 <0.01 
Nitrate + Nitrite as N 20.5 <0.01 
Nitrite as N 2.93 0.09 
Total Ammonia as N 0.899 0.34 
Total Phosphorus as P 15.9 <0.01 
Orthophosphate as P 8.80 <0.01