54 
 
SJESR: Vol. 4, No. 3, 2026, 54-66 College of Engineering / University of Samarra 
 SAMARRA JOURNAL OF ENGINEERING 
SCIENCE AND RESEARCH 
 
 
 
Hamrin Lake monitoring and sustainability in Iraq using GIS-based 
machine learning and remote sensing 
 
Qayssar Mahmood Ajaj 1*, Zainab B. Mohammed 2 
 
1- Department of Surveying Engineering Technology, Technical Engineering College of Kirkuk, Northern 
Technical University, Kirkuk, Iraq. 
2- College of Civil Engineering, University of Technology, Baghdad, Iraq . 
Article Information Abstract 
Received: 19/5/2026 
Accepted: 16/7/2026 The present research is focused on the study of the changes that have 
occurred in Hamrin Lake and to test the ability of Geographic Information 
System (GIS)- based Support Vector Machine (SVM) to provide reliable 
water monitoring. The main objective of this research is to explore the 
evolution of the Lake by using GIS, Sentinel -2 satellite images, and a 
Machine Learning ML approach, SVM classification. Based on three multi-
temporal images of the years 2017, 2022 , and 2026, we assessed the 
changes in lake extent and its surrounding s. The classification results 
indicated that in October 2017, the Hamrin Lake area was 169.09 km², 
but showed a significant drop in April 2022 to 30.08 km², and a rise t o 
almost 185.77 km² in January 2026. Such variations are driven by the 
drying conditions experienced within the catchment, hydrological 
variation, evaporation, and water management within the study area. 
The interpretation and consistency of the classified water boundaries 
with the clas sification in the generated maps showed that the SVM 
classification had an estimated overall accuracy of about 94%. The 
observed fluctuations highlight the need for monitoring support for 
sustainable water resource management and putting in place effective 
water allocation and conservation strategies in Iraq. 
Keywords 
Geographic Information 
Systems, Hamrin Lake , 
Machine Learning , 
Remote Sensing Images , 
Sustainability, Support 
Vector Machine. 
 
*Corresponding Author 
E-mail: 
qayssarajaj@ntu.edu.iq 
 
 
1. Introduction 
The interactions of land use and land cover, vegetation, and climate with the lake's 
hydrology control the lake's ecosystem response, which in turn dictates the environmental 
sustainability of lakes [1]. These parameters can be used to track trends over time, and 
significant trends with possible implications of degradation or recovery of the ecosystem can 
be identified [2]. Climate change, population growth, upstream damming, and over-exploitation 
of limited water resources have resulted in high environmental stress on many of the water 
bodies in Iraq [3 -5]. Thus, advanced monitoring approaches, which are based on GIS, RS , and 
ML, are important for environmental pl anning and sustainable development strategies [6 -8]. 
These technologies can be used by government and researchers to identify sensitive regions, 
55 
 
determine the condition of these ecosystems, and apply management strategies for the 
ecosystem that are appropriate [9]. RS and GIS are now becoming effective tools to deliver 
highly accurate and rapid spatial information in a large spatial region, and are useful in 
environmental monitoring and sustainability analysis over large areas [ 10, 11]. GIS helps to 
integrate and visualize spatial data and analyse it, while satellite imagery is used to monitor 
land and water resources [12]. These technologies allow lake changes to be studied at both 
temporal and spatial scales, identify degradation of the environment , and provide support for 
sustainable decision -making processes [13]. Specifically, multispectral satellite information 
from the Sentinel-2 and Landsat missions is useful in terms of spatial and temporal resolution 
for water body mapping, vegetation cover, soil information, and land-use change [14]. In recent 
years, ML techniques have greatly enhanced the capability of RS analysis, increasing the success 
of classification and automatic feature extraction processes [15]. In recent years, the use of 
remote sensing, GIS, and machine learning in monitoring water resources in Iraq has been 
shown to be effective, especially in a climate of growing climate variability and water scarcity 
[12, 13]. Major Iraqi reservoirs have been investigated, showing considerable surface water 
extent variations due to drought [11], water regulation by upstream reservoirs , and seasonal 
hydrological variations, which underscores the need for continuous monitoring of surface 
water over the reservoirs using geospatial approaches to facilitate sustainable water resource 
management [16 , 17]. SVM and GIS/RS data can provide efficient tools for monitoring 
environmental changes [18] and evaluating the sustainability indicators of complex 
ecosystems, such as lakes and wetlands [19, 20]. 
Hamrin Lake is very important for the provision of water and agricultural resources, 
fisheries, biodiversity, and ecological balance in the region, and it is considered to be one of the 
most important freshwater resources in Iraq. The lake has undergone significant 
environmental changes over the last few decades due to climate variability, extended droughts, 
a de crease in inflow from tributaries, sedimentation, and increasing human impacts. Water 
quality and quantity issues have been adversely impacted by t hese challenges, leading to 
changes in the lake's surface area and ecosystem degradation. Therefore, monitoring and 
evaluating these changes in the environment is a necessity to ensure sustainable water 
resource management and the integrity of the lake's ecosystem. 
The novelty of this study does not come from the individual GIS, remote sensing, or machine 
learning, but rather from their use in combination for Hamrin Lake, a reservoir that has been 
quantitatively assessed spatiotemporally only a few times. Moreover, the present study 
presents a multi-temporal assessment (2017–2026) of the lake dynamics based on Sentinel -2 
images and SVM classification for susta inable water management. The proposed workflow is 
an achievable and translatable solution for monitoring Iraqi reservoirs under climatic and 
hydrological changes. 
The aim of this study is to monitor the environmental changes and sustainability status of 
Hamrin Lake with the use of GIS -based SVM classification in the context of RS information. 
Multi-temporal satellite imagery is used to study changes in water extent, land use, and 
vegetation dynamics over the years. The efficacy of the SVM algorithm for the correct 
classification of environmental characteristics and identification of spatial changes in a lake 
ecosystem is also evaluated. The obtained results would be useful in the process of sustainable 
environmental management, as well as for providing scientific data to decision-makers, and the 
56 
 
great importance of using ML together with geospatial technologies in environmental 
monitoring applications in Iraq. 
 
2. Methodology 
2.1 Study area 
Hamrin Lake is one of the largest man-made reservoirs in the eastern part of Iraq, created 
by the construction of the Hamrin Dam on the Diyala River [21]. The lake is situated between 
the governorates of Diyala and Salah al -Din and is a vital source of irrigation water, flood 
control, fisheries, and water suppl y [22]. The climate is semi -arid with hot summers, low 
rainfall, and high evaporation, which have a significant impact on water levels. Many villages, 
farmland and bare land are found around the lake [23]. 
Climatic variability and increasing water demand have led to numerous environmental and 
hydrological changes in Hamrin Lake in recent years. Hamrin Lake is located in Iraq as indicated 
in the figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1. Hamrin Lake's geographical location in Iraq. 
 
2.2 Flowchart 
Figure 2 illustrates the general methodology used to monitor the spatial and temporal 
dynamics of Lake Hamrin. The first step of the study was to download Sentinel -2 Level -2A 
satellite imagery, along with climatic data such as air temperature and rainfall. The satellite 
images were processed to ensure spatial consistency by cropping them to fit the study area, 
57 
 
layering them, and projecting them onto the WGS 1984 coordinate system. Representative 
training samples were then selected from the main land cover classes. The water was classified 
relative to the surrounding land using the Supporting Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm. These 
classified images were used to estimate the lake's area and determine its changes between 2017 
and 2026. To quantify the spatial and temporal changes, area statistics and thematic maps were 
prepared. All collected data were integrated int o a GIS database for visualization and analysis. 
Finally, the results were interpreted to determine environmental sustainability and provide 
decision-making information to aid in the long -term management and conservation planning 
of Lake Hamrin. 
 
 
Fig.2. Methodology steps. 
 
58 
 
2.3 Data acquisition 
The first step of the methodology was to gather Sentinel -2 Level-2A satellite imagery to 
monitor Hamrin Lake. Multi-temporal images were chosen for 2017, 2022, and 2026 to assess 
temporal changes in the extent of the lake and were downloaded from Copernicus Data Space 
Ecosystem [24]. Due to their high spatial resolution and free availability for environmental 
applications, Sentinel-2 imagery was selected. The resolution of the images acquired was 20 m, 
which is adequate for identifying water boundaries and surrounding land features. The low 
percentages of cloud coverage enhanced the image quality and reliability of image 
classification. Images were acquired in the WGS1984 coordinate system to facilitate spatial 
consistency in analysis. The dates of the selec ted acquisitions were associated with different 
hydrological conditions of the lake. The valuable spectral information was provided by satellite 
data, which was used to distinguish water and non -water classes. The multi -date imagery 
allowed for the detecti on of change over time and trend analysis. The major database for the 
following stage of GIS and ML analysis was created in this stage. Table 1 reports the images' 
properties. Furthermore, Figure 3 shows annual rainfall and temperature of Hamrin Lake from 
2017 to 2026. 
Table 1. Images properties. 
Image Type Date of Sensing Cloud Coverage Resolution Coordinate System 
Sentinel-2 LA2 10/10/2017 0.0037% 20m WGS1984 
Sentinel-2 LA2 13/04/2022 0.0443% 20m WGS1984 
Sentinel-2 LA2 27/01/2026 0.0095% 20m WGS1984 
 
 
Fig. 3. Annual rainfall and temperature of Hamrin Lake from 2017 to 2026. 
Annual precipitation in mm and mean air temperature in ºC were downloaded from NASA 
POWER, a data access viewer online application , on 27 th May 2026 [25]. The data show 
generally drier conditions around and/or about 2022, with less rainfall and greater warming , 
which agree with the observed decrease in the lake surface area. The recovery in the extent of 
the lake, on the other hand, is stronger during the years of better precipitation conditions 
(2026). The results are consistent with the hypothesis that cl imate variations were a major 
contributor to the lake level changes recorded, in addition to local water management actions. 
 
 
59 
 
2.4 Pre-processing 
The image was pre-processed to enhance the image quality and to make the satellite data 
suitable for classification. The surface reflectance products were used as Sentinel-2 Level-2A 
(L2A) products where atmospheric correction was already carried out in the Copernicus 
processing chain. The Scene Classification Layer (SCL) that was delivered with the L2A products 
was used to mask the cloudy pixels before SVM classification. 
Spectral bands from Sentinel-2 were layered to create multi -band composite images after 
the removal of clouds. To minimize processing time and only process the Hamrin Lake basin, 
the study area was clipped from the original scenes. All bands were resampled to ensure the 
same spatial resolution. Spatial compatibility was achieved through projection and coordinate 
system adjustments, using WGS1984. Water bodies and land features were more visible due to 
image enhancement. Pre-processing reduced the noise and geometric distortion of the images. 
These procedures increased the reliability of the ML classification process. The final dataset 
after processing was suitable for feature extraction and model building. 
The image processing and classification were done in ArcGIS 10.8. To guarantee that the 
analysis is spatially consistent, Sentinel -2 Level-2A imagery was projected in the WGS 1984 / 
UTM Zone 38N coordinate reference system. Optimized training samples for the major land -
cover classes were used to implement a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier with the 
default ArcGIS parameters. 
 
2.5 ML and analysis 
The machine learning and classification phase was targeted for water body extraction using 
the SVM classification model. The processed Sentinel-2 images were sampled for training water 
and non -water classes. The SVM algorithm was trained with these samples to differentiate 
between land cover classes in terms of their spectra. A series of feature selection methods was 
applied to select the best spectral bands to detect water. 
Samples for training the SVM classifier were visually interpreted from the Sentinel-2 Level-
2A images and were manually selected to represent the dominant land -cover classes (water 
and the surrounding land). The spatial distribution of samples throughout the study area was 
assessed to evaluate spectral variability and ensure less classification bias. This sampling 
method provided class signatures that were representative , and the reproducibility and 
reliability of the classification were enhanced. 
The SVM model was then built and optimized with the goal of achieving a higher 
classification accuracy and minimizing misclassification. The trained model was able to 
distinguish between open water and the areas around the water. 
The two main land-cover classes (Hamrin Lake water versus adjacent land) were manually 
identified from the training data and implemented into ArcGIS with the SVM classifier. The 
training samples were selected with visual interpretation of false colour composite images from 
Sentinel-2, with the aim of having representative spectral signatures. An independent set of 
validation samples was used to evaluate the classification performance, and a confusion matrix 
was used to calculate the overall accuracy. The ov erall accuracy (OA) of approximately 94% 
demonstrated the accuracy of the Supporting Vector Machine (SVM) classification in detecting 
the spatial and temporal variations of Lake Hamrin. The lake dynamic classification maps were 
generated in 2017, 2022, and 2026. The water extent change detection was used to determine 
water extent differences between the study years. Area changes (increase or decrease) that are 
60 
 
statistically significant were detected . This phase was marked by the success of the use of ML 
techniques for the environmental monitoring and assessment of lakes' sustainability. 
The area of the lake was determined using the SVM-classified raster by extracting the water 
class and converting it to polygons in ArcGIS. Post-classification, the Raster to Polygon tool was 
used to create vector polygons to delineate the lake extent for each study year. The surface area 
was then calculated in the WGS 1984 / UTM Zone 3 8N coordinate system using the Calculate 
Geometry Attributes function with the polygon geometry to ensure the area measurement is in 
square meters. Values calculated were conv erted to (km²) for comparison. The resulting lake 
extents were 169.09 km² in 2017, 30.08 km² in 2022, and 185.77 km² in 2026. The values 
suggest a significant decline through the drought and a vigorous rebound in wetter conditions. 
All three years were processed using the same projection and consistent processing technique, 
so the areas calculated were comparable and truly represented changes in the extent of the 
lakes and not a difference in processing techniques. 
 
2.6 Outputs evaluation 
Several thematic maps and analytical results on the sustainability of Hamrin Lake were 
created at the output stage. Maps of water extent were produced in 2017, 2022 , and 2026 to 
show the spatial distribution changes. These maps clearly show changes in the size of the lake 
and how much water was available in the lake over time. The temporal change and trends in 
lake area were quantified through the creation of change and trend analysis graphs. The results 
were categorized, and water conditions and environmen tal change indicators were shown to 
be sustainable. 
GIS databases with the spatial layers and attribute data were developed for further analysis 
and future monitoring. The output produced was accurate in terms of graphical and statistical 
depiction of lake dynamics. Hydrological changes and environmental st ress conditions were 
facilitated by maps and charts. The products produced can be used for scientific research and 
environmental management applications. In all the outputs , the outputs were an integrated 
long-term change of the lake. 
 
2.7 Sustainability evaluation 
The final step involved implementing the results for sustainable management and decision-
making of the environment. Maps and analytical water products produced in the project will be 
very useful for the water resource managers and policymakers in Iraq. The results show when 
water levels have dropped significantly and if there are any potential risks to be worried about 
for Hamrin Lake. Temporal monitoring and change detection results can be used to develop 
sustainable management strategies. GIS and RS techn ologies allow water resources to be 
continuously monitored at a low cost and high efficiency. The methodology can be used for 
conservation planning and long-term environmental sustainability assessments. The produced 
database will enable decision-makers to make better use of water resources and drought 
management techniques. The study also helps in developing strategies for the future for climate 
adaptation and ecosystem protection. Sustainable development targets can be achieved 
through continuous monit oring. Continuous monitoring can help reduce environmental 
degradation and help towards sustainable development targets. 
 
 
61 
 
3. Results 
The analysis results from the ML and RS techniques using GIS indicated that the extent of 
Hamrin Lake surface area (HSA) has experienced a significant change from 2017 to 2026, both 
in terms of space and time. By using an SVM classification model, the wate r bodies and land 
features around the water bodies were identified visually in Sentinel -2 images with a high 
degree of accuracy and mapped. These variations in the size of the lakes from one year to the 
next were clearly demonstrated in the classified maps, which represented the impact of climatic 
variability, water management, and hydrology. The Sentinel -2 image from 2017 showed the 
lake area of Hamrin Lake to be around 169.09 km² with a relatively stable hydrological status. 
The lake boundary classificati on using SVM was proven to be accurate, as it was able to 
distinguish the lake from barren and agricultural lands, indicating the suitability of the ML 
methods used for water body extraction. However, the image captured in 2022 showed a huge 
decrease in th e surface area of the lake to almost 30.08 km². The classified map showed very 
pronounced shrinkage in the southern and central parts of the lake, which appeared to be due 
to the result of a long drought, decreased inflow of water from the river, and incre ased 
evaporation rates. This is a downward trend reflecting the increased environmental stresses 
and therefore sustainability concerns on water resources in Iraq. An extraordinary increase in 
the lake area was observed in the year 2026 where the area was 1 85.77 km². According to the 
water map based on SVM, the water area has drastically increased compared to 2022, 
particularly in the northern and eastern parts of the reservoir. This increase may be linked to 
improved rainfall patterns and/or improved water release arrangements, or seasonal 
hydrological changes. The results from the three years are compared and show how dynamic 
Hamrin Lake is and the need for ongoing monitoring. The variation chart also shows the 
changes in the area of the lake, with the lowe st value in 2022 and the highest in 2026. GIS and 
RS classification worked well for detecting environmental changes, while the SVM classification 
worked well for the overall sustainability evaluation of Hamrin Lake. 
The Overall Accuracy of SVM was found to be around 94%, which was an excellent level of 
agreement with the reference data. The confusion matrix showed high classification reliability 
for water and surrounding land classes, and proved the SVM model to be su itable for 
monitoring the spatiotemporal changes of Hamrin Lake. SVM performs better than other 
classifiers reported from previous studies in water body classification, e.g., Maximum 
Likelihood and Random Forest classifiers in water body classification fro m Sentinel-2 images 
for binary classification [26, 27]. 
The results showed the significance of geospatial technologies to facilitate sustainable 
water resource management and environmental decision -making in Iraq. Figure 4 represents 
Sentinel-2 image maps of Hamrin Lake. Figure 5 shows SVM-based Hamrin Lake variation from 
2017 to 2026. These variations in lake area are shown in a Bar chart in Figure 6. 
The spatial variation of Hamrin Lake extent in 2017, 2022, and 2026 is shown in the figure 
and indicates that the reduction in extent was not uniform across the entire lake. The greatest 
loss was in the southern and south-eastern part of the reservoir, where areas of shallow water 
were the first to be lost with lower water availability. By comparis on, the water -holding 
capacity of deeper parts of the central and northern regions was greater, hence better 
hydrological resilience. The restoration in 2026 was in accord with the original lake 
morphology, but various areas of the lake were still isolated, indicating that shoreline processes 
are very responsive to water level changes. The exposed margins in 2022 were found to be 
62 
 
associated with the adjacent barren and agricultural lands, which suggests a direct relationship 
between the lake contraction and the land use change in the surroundings. As the water level 
fell, areas that were previously flooded were exposed, thus expanding the dry land mass around 
the reservoir. In contrast, in 2026, the rewetting of many areas around the lake was caused by 
the lake expansion, highlighting the close relationship between hydrology and land use. These 
local observations highlight the need for the combination of GIS and remote sensing in order to 
delineate vulnerable shoreline areas and to aid reservoir management for sustainable 
development. 
 
 (a) (b) 
 
(c) 
Fig. 4. Sentinel-2 image maps of Hamrin Lake in (a) 2017, (b) 2022, (c) 2026. 
63 
 
 
Fig. 5. SVM-based Hamrin Lake variation from 2017 to 2026. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Bar chart of Hamrin Lake surface water area. 
4. Discussion 
The results revealed that the water extent of Hamrin Lake during the study period 
experienced significant variations, which highlights the vulnerability of the water resources in 
Iraq to climatic and hydrological changes. The extreme decrease in 2022 is in dicative of the 
negative effect of the drought, absence of inflow from tributaries , and high evaporation rates 
caused by the rise in temperature. The latter, however, shows an improvement in the hydrology 
in the 2026 expansion, a possible result of more pr ecipitation and water management. The 
64 
 
results of the application of the SVM model are positive and prove that the application of ML 
techniques using GIS and Sentinel -2 data can be used to monitor the dynamics of lakes. The 
results are based on the importance of continuous monitoring of water r esources through RS 
for sustainable water resource planning and environmental management in Iraq. Water surface 
changes around Hamrin Lake are very dynamic in the time series (2017-2026), as indicated by 
the trend analysis. The lake , in terms of condition , was medium and was hydrologically 
balanced in 2017, with a relatively stable area of 169.09 km². But in 2022, there was a dramatic 
decrease in the area of the lake, which sharply decreased to about 30.08 km². This has been a 
difficult stretch of environmental stress, which has been blamed on a mix of the impacts of years 
of drought, reduced river flows, increased demand for water, and increased evaporation rates 
from climate warming. The trend changed in 2026 when the lake area was much larger, 
approximately 185.77 km², as compared to 2017. The increase is a hydrological recovery that 
can be attributed to better seasonal inflows, better rainfall and/or better water resource 
management practices. The overall temporal trend indicates that Hamrin Lake is very sensitive 
to climatic variability and human use of the water resources . The results also confirmed that 
the methods of RS, GIS , and SVM have great potential for detecting environmenta l changes in 
the long term and to ease the monitoring of the lakes in Iraq in a sustainable way. 
 
5. Conclusions 
This study showed the ability of using the integration of GIS, ML methods , and Sentinel-2 
RS images to monitor the spatial and temporal dynamics of Hamrin Lake in Iraq, which was 
confirmed by the results of the study. The lakes were successfully classified with an SVM 
classification model, and the water bodies and land use around the lakes were demarcated to 
assess the change in these lakes in the selected years 2017, 2022, and 2026. Thematic maps and 
statistical analysis clearly showed significant changes in Hamrin Lake extent, which is 
indicative of its sensitivity to environmental and climatic change. The results showed that the 
area of the lake in 2017 was 169.09 km2 and it reached 30.08 km2 in 2022 , which is a 
remarkable decrease. This very low reduction is attributed to the magnitude of the droughts 
and river flow reductions, increased evaporation and water source stress. Such a reduction on 
this scale is a significant concern for environmental health, and has the potential to impa ct 
water ecosystems, farmers' livelihoods, wildlife, and water safety. The area of the lake in 2026, 
however, was very impressive, with an area of approximately 185.77 km2. This increase is a 
result of better hydrological conditions, more seasonal variability in precipitation, and/or 
better water management strategies. Through the trend analysis, it was concluded that there 
are continuous changes in Hamrin Lake's environment and that the lake should be monitored 
frequently to ensure sustainable management. 
In addition to providing historical knowledge of the lake extent, the study proves that GIS, 
remote sensing, and machine learning can be used as a viable tool for ongoing environmental 
monitoring in data-poor areas. The suggested workflow yields reliable spatial information for 
early detection of environmental changes and water resource planning based on evidence. The 
application of this is transferable to other Iraqi reservoirs with similar climatic and 
hydrological conditions. Thus, the study provides a scalable geospatial monitoring scheme that 
can be used to facilitate sustainable water management and to guide decision-making for 
environmental protection in the context of a changing climate. 
65 
 
GIS and ML proved to be effective and cost -efficient in detecting environmental changes, 
generating accurate information in the spatial domain , and supporting decision-making. The 
proposed method will facilitate the consistent and timely mapping of the dynamics of lakes, 
which will be useful for the sustainable management of water resources. The present study did 
not include an economic comparison with conventional monitoring me thods, which is 
recommended for further study. 
Furthermore, Sentinel -2 data was shown to be suitable for the monitoring of water 
resources at high resolution in arid and semi -arid areas. In general, the results of this study 
emphasize the role of geospatial technologies in attaining environmental susta inability and 
optimizing water resources management in Iraq. Continuous monitoring coupled with 
advanced analytical techniques could play a large role in safeguarding lakes and sustainable 
environmental planning in a changing climate. 
This study has a number of limitations that it is important to recognize. Only Sentinel -2 
Level-2A data with three representative observation years were used for the analysis and thus 
do not reflect all conditions in the shorter -term lake dynamics. Furthermore, the level of 
classification was teste d with image -based reference data, instead of large -scale field -based 
ground truth observations. More studies are needed to combine multi -source satellite data, in 
situ data , and more frequent temporal observation s to further increase the accuracy of 
monitoring and interpretation. 
 
References 
[1] M. A. Meteab, A. F. Abdullah, H. J. Jumaah, and M. H. Ameen, “Water indices and machine learning classification 
of Al-Razzaza Lake in Iraq: A sustainable perspective,” Math. Model. Eng. Probl., vol. 13, no. 2, p. 305, 2026. 
 
[2] A. Azareh, E. R. Sardooi, H. Gholami, A. Mosavi, A. Shahdadi, and S. Barkhori, “Detection and prediction of lake 
degradation using landscape metrics and remote sensing dataset,” Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., vol. 28, no. 21, pp. 27283 –
27298, 2021. 
 
[3] Q. M. Ajaj, H. A. Abdullah, S. A. Bakr, and H. J. Jumaah, “Spatiotemporal analysis of Al-Dalmaj Marsh in Iraq using 
Sentinel-2 imagery and GIS-based classification methods,” Int. J. Des. Nat. Ecodyn., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1965–1976, 2025. 
 
[4] H. J. Jumaah, N. K. Khursheed, V. F. Salahalden, and M. H. A. Sulyman, “Integration of remote sensing and artificial 
intelligence in detecting the environmental changes of Najaf Sea in Iraq using NDWI and GIS,” Eng. Technol. Appl. Sci. 
Res., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 26107–26112, 2025. 
 
[5] M. R. Mahmood, B. I. Abrahem, H. J. Jumaah, H. A. Alalwan, and M. M. Mohammed, “Drought monitoring of large 
lakes in Iraq using remote sensing images and normalized difference water index (NDWI),” Results Eng., vol. 25, Art. 
no. 103854, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.rineng.2024.103854. 
 
[6] A. Maurya and A. Kumar, “The role of GIS in the study of sustainable development and environmental management,” 
Int. J. Multidiscip. Res., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1–13, 2024. 
[7] Y. Deng, Y. Zhang, D. Pan, S. X. Yang, and B. Gharabaghi, “Review of recent advances in remote sensing and 
machine learning methods for lake water quality management,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 22, Art. no. 4196, 2024. 
 
[8] M. Shaikh and F. Birajdar, “Advancements in remote sensing and GIS for sustainable groundwater monitoring: 
Applications, challenges, and future directions,” Int. J. Res. Eng. Sci. Manag., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 16–24, 2024. 
 
[9] G. E. Host, J. Schuldt, J. J. H. Ciborowski, L. B. Johnson, T. Hollenhorst, and C. Richards, “Use of GIS and remotely 
sensed data for a priori identification of reference areas for Great Lakes coastal ecosystems,” Int. J. Remote Sens. , vol. 
26, no. 23, pp. 5325–5342, 2005. 
 
66 
 
[10] K. E. Sawaya, L. G. Olmanson, N. J. Heinert, P. L. Brezonik, and M. E. Bauer, “Extending satellite remote sensing 
to local scales: Land and water resource monitoring using high-resolution imagery,” Remote Sens. Environ., vol. 88, nos. 
1–2, pp. 144–156, 2003. 
 
[11] M. H. Ameen, H. J. Jumaah, and N. K. Khorsheed, “An analysis of hydrologic dynamics in Hamrin Lake, Iraq using 
remote sensing and GIS techniques,” DYSONA Appl. Sci., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 96–103, 2025. 
 
[12] H. J. Jumaah, M. H. Ameen, and B. Kalantar, “Surface water changes and water depletion of Lake Hamrin, Eastern 
Iraq, using Sentinel-2 images and geographic information systems,” Adv. Environ. Eng. Res., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2023. 
 
[13] H. J. Jumaah, M. H. Ameen, G. H. Mohamed, and Q. M. Ajaj, “Monitoring and evaluation Al-Razzaza Lake changes 
in Iraq using GIS and remote sensing technology,” Egypt. J. Remote Sens. Space Sci., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 313–321, 2022. 
 
[14] H. J. Jumaah, A. Ghanbari, A. T. Jasim, and Z. A. Khalaf, “Using RS and AI GIS in land management and urban 
planning in Mosul, Iraq for sustainable development,” Geod. Cartogr., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 165–177, 2025. 
 
[15] Y. Pang et al., “Remote sensing extraction of lakes on the Tibetan Plateau based on the Google Earth Engine and 
deep learning,” Remote Sens., vol. 16, no. 3, Art. no. 583, 2024. 
 
[16] M. Hasan, A. Moody, L. Benninger, and H. Hedlund, “How war, drought, and dam management impact water supply 
in the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers,” Ambio, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 264–279, 2019. 
 
[17] N. Al-Ansari, S. Saleh, T. Abdullah, and S. A. Abed, “Quality of surface water and groundwater in Iraq,” Earth Sci. 
Geotech. Eng., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 161–199, 2021. 
 
[18] A. B. Rabie, M. Elhag, and A. Subyani, “Remote sensing, GIS, and machine learning in water resources management 
for arid agricultural regions: A review,” Water, vol. 17, no. 21, Art. no. 3125, 2025. 
 
[19] A. Ghanbari and H. J. Jumaah, “Monitoring surface water area changes of Najaf Sea in Iraq using RS and GIS for 
sustainable development,” in Proc. Adv. Eng. Days, vol. 9, 2024, pp. 323–325. 
 
[20] J. Dong, X. Liang, B. Du, Y. Ju, Y. Wang, and H. Guo, “Applications of geographic information systems in ecological 
impact assessment: A methods landscape, practical bottlenecks, and future pathways,” Sustainability, vol. 17, no. 22, Art. 
no. 10358, 2025. 
 
[21] R. Y. Hussain, “Submerged surface area and water storage volume of Hamrin Dam Lake using contour lines,” Iraqi 
J. Sci., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3524–3535, 2024. 
 
[22] K. S. Kazkoz and M. A. Al-Azzawi, “Water management of agricultural lands in Diyala Governorate,” in IOP Conf. 
Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., vol. 1222, no. 1, Art. no. 012019, Aug. 2023. 
 
[23] S. B. Abdul-Razak and H. M. Abduljabbar, “The impact of seasonal changes on the land cover of Lake Hamrin: A 
comparative study of dry and wet seasons,” Ibn Al-Haitham J. Pure Appl. Sci., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 128–139, 2026. 
 
[24] Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem, “Hamrin Lake”, https://browser.dataspace.copernicus.eu. 
 
[25] NASA POWER, “Hamrin Lake”, https://power.larc.nasa.gov/data-access-viewer. 
 
[26] N. P. N. Nathalia, G. A. R. Wijaya, K. Y. E. Aryanto, N. P. N. P. Dewi, P. H. Saputra, N. P. K. Dewi, et al ., 
“Comparison of SVM, K -NN, RF, CART, and GNB algorithms for water bodies detection using Sentinel -2 Level-2A 
imagery in Nakhon Pathom, Thailand,” Int. J. Appl. Sci. Smart Technol., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 145–158, 2025. 
 
[27] Y. S. Bhageerath, S. V. S. P. Sharma, S. R. P., and K. D. Rao, “An object -based custom ensemble framework for 
automated water body extraction using Sentinel-2 imagery,” Environ. Monit. Assess., vol. 198, no. 8, Art. no. 826, 2026.