LETTER • OPEN ACCESS
Multi-scale planning model for robust urban
drought response
To cite this article: Marta Zaniolo et al 2023 Environ. Res. Lett. 18 054014
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
You may also like
Spatial planning for water sustainability
projects under climate uncertainty:
balancing human and environmental water
needs
Rachel E Fovargue, Shabnam Rezapour,
Derek Rosendahl et al.
-
The potential economic value of
agricultural and urban water from forecast
informed reservoir operations (FIRO) in
California
Thomas W Corringham, Denali M Pinto, F
Martin Ralph et al.
-
Global drought risk in cities: present and
future urban hotspots
Tristian R Stolte, Hans de Moel, Elco E
Koks et al.
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 4.242.195.242 on 05/10/2026 at 19:28
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/acceb5
OPEN ACCESS
RECEIVED
1 December 2022
REVISED
7 March 2023
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION
20 April 2023
PUBLISHED
2 May 2023
Original Content from
this work may be used
under the terms of the
Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 licence.
Any further distribution
of this work must
maintain attribution to
the author(s) and the title
of the work, journal
citation and DOI.
LETTER
Multi-scale planning model for robust urban drought response
Marta Zaniolo1,∗, Sarah Fletcher1,4,5 and Meagan S Mauter1,2,3,4,5
1 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
2 Global Environmental Policy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
3 Precourt Institute for Energy, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
4 W oods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, United States of America
5 Fletcher and Mauter equally co-supervised the study.
∗ Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail:mzaniolo@stanford.edu
Keywords: urban drought security, water reuse, water desalination, water infrastructure adaptation, reinforcement learning
Supplementary material for this article is available online
Abstract
Increasingly severe droughts are straining municipal water resources and jeopardizing urban water
security, but uncertainty in their duration, frequency, and intensity challenges drought planning
and response. W e develop the Drought Resilient Interscale Portfolio Planning model (DRIPP) to
generate optimal planning responses to urban drought. DRIPP is a generalizable multi-scale
framework for optimizing dynamic planning strategies of long-term infrastructure deployment
and short-term drought response. It integrates climate and hydrological variability with
high-fidelity representations of urban water distribution, available technology options, and
demand reduction measures to yield robust and cost-effective water supply portfolios that are
location-specific. W e apply DRIPP in Santa Barbara, California to assess how least cost water
supply portfolios vary under different drought scenarios and identify portfolios that are robust
across drought scenarios. In Santa Barbara, we find that drought intensity, not duration or
frequency, drives cost increases, reliability risk, and regret of overbuilding infrastructure. Under
uncertain drought conditions, a diversified technology portfolio that includes both rapidly
deployable, decentralized technologies alongside larger centralized technologies minimizes water
supply cost while maintaining high robustness to climate uncertainty.
1.Introduction
The city of Santa Barbara built the Charles E. Mayer
ocean desalination plant to address the water supply
crisis caused by the late 1980s drought. After con-
struction and commissioning, the plant was operated
for four months (March–June, 1992), at which point
abundant rainfall ended the drought and made desal-
inated water economically undesirable. The plant
was modernized and reactivated in May, 2017 at an
additional capital investment of $72 million, nearly
double the initial construction investment [1]. While
desalinated water now provides rainfall-independent
supply comprising 30% of Santa Barbara’s water
demand, the cost of producing and delivering this
water is five-fold that of surface water [ 2]. These
increased costs are reflected in household water bills
and municipal energy demand.
Santa Barbara’s history is not unique. In regions
where water availability is highly variable and affected
by climate change, water planners must make difficult
infrastructure investment decisions that will affect
water security, affordability, and equitable access dec-
ades into the future [ 3, 4]. Drought intensity, dura-
tion, and frequency, are expected to increase in many
regions of the world [ 5], but how and how much
is difficult to assess, and harder to predict then, for
instance, average precipitation trends [ 6, 7]. When
droughts abate, large expensive technologies appear
to have been a bad investment. Some emerging tech-
nologies, like rapidly deployable small scale mod-
ular systems provide a more flexible alternative to
centralized system deployment, but their per-unit
cost of water treated is often higher [ 8]. Low-cost
water supply portfolios that are robust in the face of
changing climates require decision support tools that
© 2023 The Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
explicitly assess the interactions between future cli-
mate uncertainty, hydrological variability, and tech-
nology attributes.
Choosing optimal sources, timing their imple-
mentation, and managing the portfolio of existing
resources under uncertainty is too complex a prob-
lem for traditional decision-making methods like life-
cycle cost-benefit analysis [ 9–11]. Instead, most aca-
demic water resources planning models incorporate
decision-making under deep uncertainty and focus
on developing strategies that are robust and adapt-
ive to changing conditions. These approaches identify
dynamic planning policies that respond to hydrolo-
gical conditions as they unfold over time, with the
aim of preventing over- and under-building [12–14].
For instance, these models use optimization to find
low-cost robust water planning strategies in light of
regional coordination opportunities [ 15, 16], imple-
mentation uncertainty [17], timing of infrastructural
development [ 18, 19], drought characteristics [ 20],
and preserving optionality for future infrastructure
expansion [21, 22]. However, the water supply plan-
ning literature typically considers a limited number
of hedging strategies [ 23] and infrastructure options
[24] for water storage and diversion at the basin scale.
This coarse spatial scale adequately represents climate
uncertainty, but poorly represents water augmenta-
tion options at multiple scales, and typically aggreg-
ates cities into a single demand point.
Urban water literature, in contrast, has demon-
strated that high-resolution, household-level mod-
eling that explicitly considers distribution of water
to end-users is necessary to accurately identify
opportunities to integrate centralized and decent-
ralized technologies [ 25–28], target demand-side
management [ 29–31], and estimate the operational
costs of urban or regional water supply networks [25,
32, 33]. Y et, these urban-level studies typically neglect
climate uncertainty and hydrological variability, lead-
ing to static infrastructure portfolios that are costly
and ineffective if water availability is highly variable.
W e need urban water planning frameworks that
both respond to climate uncertainty at large scales,
and represent urban demand and technologies at a
high resolution. By integrating the state of the art in
water resources planning and urban water literature,
we can leverage the benefits of both scales, yielding
to multi-scale, climate-robust solutions that include
large to small-scale planning options and demand-
side efforts. W e introduce the Drought Resilient Inter-
scale Portfolio Planning (DRIPP), a modeling frame-
work that integrates regional and urban-scale water
models to identify vulnerabilities to plausible future
droughts and design robust solutions. State-of-the-
art tools in these fields have never been brought
together, in large part due to computational limita-
tions. W e overcome this challenge by drawing from
recent advances in reinforcement learning methods
that couple universal approximators (e.g. neural net-
works, decision trees) with multi-objective evolution-
ary global parameter optimizers [ 34, 35]. W e employ
a decision tree-based method [ 36, 37] that allows us
to optimally design water augmentation measures in
combination with the hydrological and technological
signposts that dynamically trigger their implementa-
tion across stochastic drought realizations.
W e consider several non-traditional water sup-
ply sources and treatment options, and characterize
them across multiple attributes including their level-
ized cost, time to deployment, and scalability. W e cre-
ate climate scenarios which reflect plausible changes
in drought characteristics of frequency, duration, and
intensity via synthetic streamflow generation [38]. W e
solve this optimization problem to find lowest-cost,
robust planning strategies under these drought scen-
arios with bottom-up vulnerability analysis [ 12], in
order to assess the relative influence of each drought
attribute on planning strategies, water system costs,
and robustness.
With this work, we expect to make two contribu-
tions. First, we create a framework that yields cost-
effective and drought-robust water supply portfo-
lios that respond dynamically to climate uncertainty
and hydrological variability, and employ drought
mitigation options at different scales and resolu-
tion. Second, we demonstrate that different types of
drought require different planning strategies, and we
analyse why certain portfolios are robust and low-cost
in certain climates, but not others.
W e apply DRIPP to the drought-stricken muni-
cipality of Santa Barbara, California. The state of Cali-
fornia requires water utilities to demonstrate pre-
paredness for a design drought with a duration of
5 years and an unprescribed intensity (i.e. magnitude
of shortage) and frequency [ 39]. However, climate
change projections show that frequency, duration,
and intensity of droughts in California are likely to
increase in magnitude and variability [ 6, 7], bey-
ond the specified design drought characteristics. Our
results show that the drought characteristics spe-
cified in climate scenarios directly influence urban
water planning decisions and outcomes including
cost, installed capacity, technology type, and sys-
tem variables used to dynamically trigger decisions.
In Santa Barbara—a system characterized by abund-
ant surface storage with interannual carryover, and
minimal groundwater—drought intensity, not dur-
ation or frequency, is the most influential attribute
for determining the risk of supply deficit and the
cost associated to the water portfolio. Additionally,
rapidly deployed and easily scalable solutions like
decentralized technology and curtailment measures
are associated with higher annual cost in Santa Bar-
bara, but are more robust across a wide variety of
drought conditions, including out-of-sample climate
scenarios that are not used in optimization.
2
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Figure1. Multiscale simulation model. The model integrates climate scenarios with varying drought characteristics, regional and
watershed-level water sources, urban distribution, and water treatment options.
2.Methods
In this work we apply DRIPP to test Santa Barbara’s
water system under climate scenarios displaying vary-
ing characteristics of drought frequency, duration,
and intensity, and assess the relative influence of each
drought attribute on optimal water system costs and
planning strategies.
This section details and motivates the meth-
ods used in this work, namely the components of
the multiscale simulation model, the optimization
method, and the robustness analysis.
2.1.Multiscalesimulationmodel
W e represent Santa Barbara’s water system with the
multiscale simulation model in figure 1. This model
integrates climate scenarios with varying drought
characteristics, a conceptual water resources system
model, an urban distribution model, and treatment
train models for several treatment technologies. W e
present these elements below.
2.1.1. Identify drought characteristics that lead to
system failure
Bottom-up vulnerability analysis employs a large
sampling of plausible states of the world [ 40] to
identify relevant changes in socio-hydrological condi-
tions that produce consequential effects on the system
[14, 41–44]. Identifying the conditions that lead to
system vulnerability can direct planners to develop
anticipatory solutions to prevent those outcomes.
Note that most bottom-up, vulnerability stud-
ies focus on changes in long-term average climate
states, e.g. mean values of precipitation, temperat-
ure, streamflow [ 20]. However, short-term hydro-
logical variability governed by changes in drought
characteristics is also very influential for planning
and currently overlooked in bottom-up vulnerabil-
ity literature. This study links long-term average cli-
mate change states to statistical patterns of short-term
hydrological variability through uncertain drought
characteristics with the goal of accurately capturing
both long- and short-term vulnerability drivers.
In this work, a climate scenario comprises an
ensemble of inflow time series to Santa Barbara’s
reservoirs with a specified average drought persist-
ence P , intensity I, and frequency F . W e design four
climate scenarios: (1) Historical droughts: P , F , and I
are comparable to recent droughts in Santa Barbara;
(2) long mild droughts: double P , half I, and same
F as historical droughts; (3) Short intense droughts:
half P , double I and same F; (4) frequent droughts:
unaltered P and I, double F . P , I, and F are quanti-
fied using the standardized runoff index [ 45] (SRI)
computed on streamflow time series (details in SI
section 1). For each climate scenario, we generate an
ensemble of 50 100 year streamflow time series using
the synthetic drought generator presented in meth-
ods section ‘Drought Generator’ and illustrated in SI
section 1.
Modeling different types of droughts allows us to
systematically explore the space of plausible future
vulnerability to droughts and design robust solutions
revealing insights on their relative importance, and
how they each influence planning strategies and costs.
Lastly, we conduct an All droughts experiment that
designs optimal planning policies on the ensemble
of the four climate scenarios. By including these in
the synthetic time series that the all drought policy
is trained on, we ensure that the all drought policy is
truly robust to all plausible future droughts—an out-
come that a traditional synthetic time series approach
using historical data or climate model projections
would be unlikely to achieve.
3
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
As is common in bottom-up vulnerability liter-
ature, we generate climate scenarios using syntetic
streamflow generation [ 40]. Most synthetic stream-
flow generation tools are designed for a specific
application and allow the user to control a prespe-
cified set of case-relevant streamflow properties, for
instance AR parameters as informed by changes in
precipitation and temperature [46], annual peak flow
magnitude and total flow volume [ 47], and drought
frequency and severity [20]. Borgomeo et al [38] pro-
posed a streamflow generation method formulated
as a multiobjective optimization problem where the
objective functions represent the streamflow char-
acteristics to be controlled. In absence of an exist-
ing synthetic generator that allows to control the
drought attributes of interest for this study intens-
ity, we employ Borgomeo’s method and modify it
to control the intensity, duration, and frequency of
droughts in 100 years streamflow scenarios. The SI
section 1 contains details and experimental design for
the climate scenario generation, as well as selected
plots of climate scenarios.
2.1.2. Water resources model
The water resources model captures the routing of
water to the City of Santa Barbara from the surround-
ing sources, including inter-basin transfers from the
California State Water Project (SWP), local water
diverted from nearby reservoirs within the watershed,
and desalinated ocean water. The monthly reservoir
dynamics are described by the mass balance of their
water volumes. According to the monthly time-step
adopted in the model, the river reaches are modeled
as plug-flow canals in which the velocity and direc-
tion of flow are constant. Groundwater abstraction
is modeled as a constant 80 AF/m corresponding to
historical sustainable average abstraction [ 2] due to
data limitations and its small contribution to water
supply (around 5%–7%). More information on the
water resources model can be found in section 2 of
the SI.
2.1.3. Urban water distribution model
The urban water distribution model simulates the
distribution of water from surface water sources and
water production technologies to individual nodes
within the city through the water distribution net-
work. The building blocks of this models are injection
points connected to extra-urban water source, tanks,
consumers, non-consumer junctions, pipes, valves
and pumps. Simulating this model for a given water
supply portfolio allows to estimate the energy intens-
ity and cost of delivering water to end users for differ-
ent centralized and decentralized technology config-
urations. More details on this model are presented in
section 2 of the SI.
2.1.4. Water treatment models and water
augmentation options
The portfolio of water augmentation options con-
sidered in this work includes a number of alternative
water treatment technologies (water reuse, sea water
desalination), modes of deployment (centralized and
decentralized), and end-uses (potable and nonpot-
able). Additionally, we consider a demand reduc-
tion measure, curtailment, in which the city imposes
mandatory water restrictions as a percentage of total
demand [31, 48].
The treatment train models employed in this
work estimate the capital and operational expenses of
the considered treatment trains for a range of plant
capacities. W e estimate the costs of the considered
technology options using the Water T echnoeconomic
Assessment Pipe-Parity Platform (WaterTAP3 [ 49]).
WaterTAP3 is an open source platform that sup-
ports the simulation of a steady-state water treat-
ment train and details its performance and costs and
includes a variety of treatment unit processes con-
figurations of treatment technologies, and system-
level techno-economic assumptions. Section 3 of the
SI reports details assumptions on additional techno-
logy attributes such as location, capacity, and time to
deployment.
T able1 summarizes the multi-attribute character-
ization of alternative water augmentation options and
highlights their tradeoffs. In particular, decentralized
deployment is typically associated with a higher unit
cost (i.e. LCOW) than that of centralized techno-
logy, but it is also associated with faster and more
scalable deployment. Non-potable reuse is less costly
than potable reuse, but its end-use is limited to non-
potable applications comprising only a fraction of
the city’s water demand. Curtailment is modeled as
a water augmentation option whose capacity is equi-
valent to the curtailed demand with unit cost equi-
valent to the lost revenue incurred by the utility from
reduced water sales. Water bills are high in a water-
scarce municipality like Santa Barbara, which trans-
lates into high cost of curtailment measures, but their
deployment is immediate. In addition, curtailment
measures have been observed to induce a behavioral
change for which demand does not rebound imme-
diately to pre-drought levels after the mandate is lif-
ted. The demand rebound effect has been empirically
modeled as a survival process with a nearly 8 year half-
life [50]. See the SI section 3 for more details on these
assumptions.
2.1.5. Modeling choices and generalizability of the
method
Note that we model a modified version of the current
Santa Barbara water system. W e consider a baseline
water demand corresponding the city water use in
2013, preceding voluntary and mandated curtailment
4
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Table1. Multi-attribute characterization of the considered water augmentation options. The augmentation options (rows) are
curtailment, centralized sea water desalination (C-SW), and centralized (C) and decentralized (D) potable reuse (PR) and non potable
reuse (NPR). The attributes are the levelized cost of water (LCOW) calculated aggregating Capital and Operational expenses assuming a
deployment of 200 acre feet/month (AF/m) for 40 years, the time to deployment (TTD), minimum and maximum capacity, and
scalability. The data and assumptions used to populate this table are presented in section 3 of the SI.
LCOW ($/AF) TTD (years)
Min capacity
(AF/m)
Max capacity
(AF/m) Scalability
Curtailment 5998 0 75 375 5% through 25%
of demand
C-SW 870 10 200 500 One plant with
different capacity
options
C-PR 804 5 100 500 One plant with
different capacity
options
C-NPR 733 4 100 200 One plant with
different capacity
options
D-PR 965 3 50 350 Up to 7 plants of
50 AF/m each
D-NPR 857 2 20 140 Up to 7 plants of
20 AF/m each
observed in the city during the drought of 2015–2016.
W e also consider a baseline water portfolio includ-
ing only natural surface and groundwater sources,
and excluding water technologies currently opera-
tional in the city, namely the Charles E. Meyer sea-
water desalination plant. W e made this choice with
the aim to identify portfolio planning policies and
analyze drought impacts independently from previ-
ous, potentially suboptimal, planning and curtail-
ment measures taken by the city.
However, the DRIPP framework described in
the next section can support analysis far beyond
what is demonstrated by this case study. The user
can swap the proposed water resources model for
a different water system. Climate scenarios can be
replaced with a different ensemble of synthetic scen-
arios probing vulnerability to other climate condi-
tions. Water demand assumptions can be revisited
to reflect changing demand and population growth.
Costs, deployment, and capacity assumptions for the
water augmentation options can be updated to cap-
ture alternative technological realities in different
world regions, as well as to reflect technology innov-
ation over time. Lastly, additional water augmenta-
tion measures can be considered, including increased
water transfers, storage, enhanced regional coordina-
tion, and demand management options.
This multiscale simulation model is integrated in
a simulation-optimization framework described in
the next section.
2.2.TheDRIPPframework
The DRIPP framework is a simulation-optimization
approach that generates cost-optimal dynamic plan-
ning policies that incur no deficit on the range of cli-
mate conditions they are trained upon. In this work,
we design planning policies for each set of synthetic
climate scenarios separately, generating, and then
comparing, low-cost policies for historical, long and
mild, intense, and frequent droughts. Lastly, we train
a set of policies on all drought types conjunctively.
W e formulate this cost-optimal urban water port-
folio planning as a control problem [ 12] with flex-
ible policy structure [ 37, 51, 52]. Figure 2(a) illus-
trates the method used to generate optimal planning
policies π∗ comprising the water augmentation
decisions that minimize costs while achieving no
unmet demand across the streamflow ensemble in
each climate scenario. Decision policies are para-
meterized as an ensemble of decision trees that
implement centralized, decentralized, and curtail-
ment measures respectively in response to the state
of water resources in the system. This state comprises
several indicators that capture the hydrology, water
storage, and technology over time. T able S2 and S3
in the SI contains a list of all indicators and actions
considered in this work. Policies are optimized via
an evolutionary simulation-optimization approach
that progressively improves performance by iterat-
ively generating and testing new policies, resulting in
the optimal set of indicators, thresholds, actions, and
functional structure that minimizes costs across the
streamflow ensemble characterising a climate scen-
ario. Studies typically fix one or more of these com-
ponents a priori while optimizing the others, result-
ing in suboptimal empirical approximations. Here we
leverage a recent method that allows us to optimize all
these elements simultaneously [ 12], and we expand
it to handle an ensemble of decision trees instead of
a single tree. Our optimal decision policies therefore
explicitly identify what information is used to trig-
ger different augmentation options, improving the
5
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Figure2. The DRIPP framework. (a) Flowchart of the simulation-optimization scheme used to design optimal portfolio planning
policies. (b) Example of an optimal policy designed for historical drought conditions. PR200 indicates a centralized potable reuse
plant with production capacity of 200 AF/m, while NPR20 indicates a non-potable reuse plant of 20 AF/m. (c) Representative
system variables when simulating the policy in panel (b) on one scenario with historical drought conditions.
explainability of our results. See section 4 of the SI for
the full problem formulation as well as the adopted
experimental design.
Figure 2(b) shows an example of an optimal
policy designed on 20 climate scenarios of 100 years
with historical drought characteristics, and panel
(c) displays representative system trajectories for the
policy in panel (b) simulated on a 100 year historical
drought scenario. Policy timeseries for other drought
types and their analysis are presented in figure S6 of
the SI.
2.2.1. Robustness analysis
Robustness is an important feature of planning
policies in addressing climate uncertainty. A robust
policy has low performance variability across climate
scenarios, including out-of-sample scenarios that are
not used in policy optimization, and is more likely to
perform consistently in unknown future conditions.
In this paper we conduct two robustness tests.
In the first analysis, we test policies optimized on all
droughts across 30 out-of-sample climate scenarios of
all drought types, and select a least-cost policy and
a least-deficit policy based on their out-of sample
performance. The comparison of these two policies
reveals what attributes of a planning strategy make it
robust to the effects of climate uncertainty on plan-
ning costs vs. unmet demand.
In the second analysis, we select policies trained
on a given drought type (e.g. historical droughts), and
test them on a different drought type (e.g. short and
intense droughts), quantifying the risk and regret of
planning for the wrong drought. Our analysis quan-
tifies the risk of underpreparing for future drought
conditions and incurring deficits, as well as the regret
of overspending on drought measures that may not
be necessary.
Understanding the policy attributes and the cli-
mate conditions that contribute to policy robustness,
or policy vulnerability, are key results of the bottom-
up vulnerability analysis proposed in this work.
2.3.DRIPPwithinthelandscapeofexistingwater
decisionsupporttools
Several water system decision support models have
been proposed over the years with advanced user
interface, simulation capabilities, and representation
of alternative stakeholders and sources of uncertainty
(for a review, see [ 53]). DRIPP addresses four out-
standing challenges that limit the utility of exist-
ing water system decision support tools. First, past
approaches have relied exclusively on user’s input data
for technology options and cost parameters, which
have typically been provided as point estimates rather
than continuous functions. DRIPP integrates techno-
logy models that estimate the capital and operational
costs of an array of traditional and non-traditional
treatment trains as a function of design flow. Second,
past models largely represent cities as single demand
points, rather than a distributed network of water
6
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Figure3. Cost-optimal planning policies for different drought types. (a)–(c) Characteristics of (near-)cost-optimal policies
optimized for different drought types and averaged across 2000 simulation years. (a) Average installed capacity (b) Average
fraction of decentralized capacity in the portfolio. (c) Category of indicator used to trigger capacity expansion. (d) Average annual
cost of the cost-optimal drought planning policy designed for different drought types. The black bar indicates an additional 10%
cost that constitutes the performance range achieved by near-optimal policies.
sources and users, thereby overlooking urban distri-
bution costs, and missing opportunities to reduce dis-
tribution distance, and costs, with decentralized tech-
nology. DRIPP integrates water distribution network
models to estimate the cost of delivering water to end
users within a city, which often represents a signi-
ficant fraction of a utility’s expenses and may vary
with the portfolio of technology installed [25]. Third,
in existing methods, action deployment is triggered
exclusively by looking at storage-based indicators
[53], while DRIPP automatically selects a set of rel-
evant indicators from a multidimensional dataset of
indicators representing the state of the climate, hydro-
logy, and technology at various time aggregation.
Fourth, vulnerability studies have largely focused on
changes in long-term average climate states, (e.g.
mean values of precipitation, temperature, stream-
flow). DRIPP more accurately captures vulnerability
to extreme events by considering droughts with vary-
ing characteristics of duration, frequency, and intens-
ity. This addition enables important new insights on
the interactions between drought characteristics and
technology attributes that are not possible to identify
using existing modeling approaches. Specifically, it
allows us to identify that drought intensity, rather
than frequency or duration, drives vulnerability in
our case study, which has important policy implica-
tions given that that the design drought in California
is currently based on drought duration. Additionally,
it allows us to identify the conditions under which
small-scale decentralized technologies are useful. Our
results highlight that policies that are robust to all
drought characteristics rely on decentralized techno-
logy: while it does not comprise a large fraction of
installed capacity, it reduces system costs by reducing
the need to overbuild large centralized capacity.
However, we believe there are several opportunit-
ies to pair DRIPP with existing water decision support
tools with advanced user interfaces. Planning path-
ways designed with DRIPP’s multi-scale optimization
approach can be evaluated and contrasted via water
system models with a user-friendly graphical interface
[54, 55], integration with geographic information
system (GIS) [56], and models that estimate user pref-
erences beyond cost [53, 57].
3.Results
3.1.Optimalurbanportfolioplanningpoliciesfor
differentclimatescenarios
Figure 3 shows the impact of climate scenarios with
varying drought characteristics on optimal urban
drought planning decisions in terms of deployed
technology (panels (a) and (b)), indicators used to
trigger deployment (panel (c)), and annual water sup-
ply costs (panel (d)). W e design cost-optimal plan-
ning policies that yield no deficit for each drought
type independently and for all droughts in order
to capture how drought characteristics influence
optimal planning decisions and outcomes.
Panel (a) shows the average capacity deployed by
cost-optimal and near-optimal policies (i.e. within
10% of lowest supply costs) designed for different cli-
mate scenarios. The intensity of the color indicates
7
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
the magnitude of capacity deployed by different
(near-)cost-optimal policies. For example, the first
bar in figure 3(a) indicates that 80% of the near-
optimal policies designed for Historical drought
conditions deploy a total water supply capacity of
150 AF/month or more. The remaining 20% of cost-
optimal policies deploy less capacity, but incur in sim-
ilar costs. This indicates that while some planning
strategies are lower cost than others, planners can
choose from a range of alternative policies without
increasing total costs more than 10%. In particu-
lar, the ensemble of low-cost policies contains both
low and high deployment strategies. Low deployment
strategies select a large fraction of decentralized tech-
nology (panel (b)) and curtailment measures that
come online just-in-time in response to depleting
water reserves, and scale production to water needs,
with higher unit cost. Conversely, high deployment
strategies select centralized technology with low unit
cost and high inertia (i.e. poor scalability and high
time to deployment) that remain online when not
strictly necessary.
In contrast to the historical climate scenario, plan-
ning for a climate with long mild droughts requires a
relatively low installed capacity, as surface water stor-
age depletes slowly and allows time for technology to
come online when needed. Conversely, short intense
droughts develop abruptly, leaving water planners
little time to respond to early signs of drought and
requiring large redundancy in installed capacity to
ensure enough water production. Low-cost planning
policies for all droughts display a capacity distribu-
tion similar to short intense droughts.
Panel (b) shows the average fraction of decent-
ralized technology deployed in the portfolio. Decent-
ralized capacity is typically deployed dynamically at
the onset of a drought, as surface water storage is
depleting and the city needs quick-to-deploy tem-
porary augmentation measures. As a result, while the
fraction of decentralized capacity may appear low
when averaged across the simulation, decentralized
measures are essential to prevent shortages in critical
conditions. This is why decentralized deployment is
highest in the frequent drought climate scenarios.
The drought type also determines the type
of indicators used to trigger capacity expansion
(panel (c)). (Near-) optimal policies designed for
long mild droughts deploy capacity in response to
storage indicators, which capture the slow decline
in water resources in lakes and reservoirs. Plan-
ning policies in historical and frequent drought cli-
mates mostly respond to hydrological indicators (e.g.
drought index) that might reveal the onset of a
drought before it has a measurable impact on stor-
age levels. Short intense drought policies mainly
deploy capacity in response to technology indicat-
ors, e.g. current installed capacity. The onset of these
droughts is so abrupt that new technology cannot
be deployed dynamically in response to unfolding
drought conditions. Conversely, it is deployed if the
current installed capacity would not be adequate to
buffer an incoming drought. Lastly, policies designed
to be robust across all drought types present a similar
indicators as Short intense droughts.
The difference in planning strategies leads to very
different annual costs (panel (d)). Planning for short
intense droughts and all droughts would cost the city
of Santa Barbara over 4 M$/year, about four times
the cost of planning for long mild droughts. Planning
for historical and frequent droughts results in about
2.5 M$/year and 3 M$/year respectively.
3.2.Ensuringrobustplanningacrossalldroughts
This section presents the results of the first robust-
ness analysis performed in this work, and com-
pares the attributes of two policies trained on all
droughts and achieving, respectively, lowest out-of-
sample costs (i.e. least-cost policy) and lowest out-of-
sample unmet demand (least-deficit policy). Capa-
city, cost, and maximum annual unmet demand
of least-cost and least-deficit policies are shown in
figure 4. The least-deficit policy installs a higher aver-
age capacity than the least-cost policy (panel (a)),
indicating that including more redundancy in the sys-
tem enables high robustness to deficit. Interestingly,
however, the redundancy is not achieved by merely
oversizing the least-cost technology portfolio, but by
enhancing its flexibility and creating a more diversi-
fied portfolio of measures that includes lower cent-
ralized capacity and a significant portion of decent-
ralized capacity and curtailment measures. Given the
higher unit cost of these drought measures, the cost of
the least-deficit portfolio is 60% higher than the least-
cost, indicating that designing for robustness to water
shortage comes at a significant cost for the system
(panel (b)). The water distribution network model
estimates the cost of delivering water to users. Deploy-
ing decentralized technology is shown to reduce the
distance between the water source and the water
users, thereby reducing distribution costs. However,
this difference is small in Santa Barbara’s mostly flat
distribution network, and certainly not enough to off-
set the higher unit cost of decentralized measures. On
the other hand, robust least-cost planning exposes the
system to shortage risks, in this analysis quantified as
six times larger for the least-cost policy than for the
least-deficit policy (panel (c)).
3.3.Riskandregretofplanningforthewrong
droughttype
This section presents the results of the second robust-
ness analysis investigating the effects of planning
for the wrong drought. Drought planning in an
uncertain climate presents both the risk of incurring
water deficit through under-preparation for a severe
drought and the regret of overspending on unneces-
sary drought measures. Figure 5 quantifies the risk
and regret of planning for the wrong drought type
8
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Figure4. Least-cost vs. least-deficit planning: comparison between an least-cost policy for All droughts, which scores the lowest
out-of-sample annual cost, and a least-deficit policy, which scores the lowest out-of-sample unmet demand. The policies are
compared with respect to installed capacity (panel (a)), expected annual cost (panel (b)), and max annual unmet demand (panel
(c)) on 12 000 out-of-sample simulation years.
Figure5. Risk and regret of planning for the wrong drought type. The matrix in panel (a) represents the maximum annual
fraction of unmet demand expected in a century for a planning policy optimized on the ‘T raining’ climate scenario indicated on
the matrix rows, and tested on the scenarios indicated on the columns. Planning for climates with short intense droughts and all
droughts (third and fifth horizontal rows) ensures no unmet demand across other drought types, albeit at a higher planning cost
(see figure 3(d)). The regret of planning for these costly droughts is quantified in panel (b) as the normalized extra cost of
planning for short intense and all droughts when a different drought type unfolds.
in the city of Santa Barbara. The matrix in panel (a)
shows the maximum annual unmet demand expec-
ted in a 100 year time period for a policy optim-
ized on drought conditions in one climate scen-
ario (row) and tested across other climate scenarios
(columns). Planning for a climate with long mild
droughts (second row) produces large unmet demand
across all other climates. Short and intense droughts
are the most challenging (middle column), produ-
cing unmet demand on policies optimized for all
other climate scenarios. Planning for short intense
droughts minimizes the risk of deficit if a differ-
ent drought occurs (third row), equivalent to plan-
ning for all drought types (top row). However, plan-
ning for short intense and all droughts is expensive
(figure 3(d)). Figure 5(b) shows the extra costs, or
regret, of planning for Short intense and all droughts,
in climate scenarios without intense droughts. For
example, the regret R of planning for an expens-
ive Short intense drought when a long mild drought
unfolds is here computed as R = (CSI − CLM)/CLM
where CSI is the cost of planning for a short intense
drought, and CLM is the cost of planning for a long
mild drought. In this case the regret is significant,
leading to up to a three-fold increase in cost.
4.Discussion
This work presents DRIPP , a framework for dynamic
and drought-responsive urban water portfolio plan-
ning demonstrated for the city of Santa Barbara, Cali-
fornia. Our results underscore that high-resolution
representation of technology, climate, and system
modeling are fundamental building blocks of effect-
ive urban drought planning under a changing cli-
mate. According to the middle-range theory in
sustainability [ 58], this case study bears relevance
for many drought-prone municipalities character-
ized by low annual precipitation and large depend-
ence on surface storage. Additionally, DRIPP is easily
9
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
transferable to different case studies upon customiz-
ing the hydrological and urban distribution models.
Below, we detail their importance and implications
for planning, and we highlight areas where further
research is needed.
4.1.Technologymatters
The 20th century approach to ensuring robustness
of a water system is through redundancy: oversiz-
ing traditional centralized infrastructure by a safety
factor [8, 59]. Our results for Santa Barbara highlight
suboptimal outcomes of redundancy planning under
growing climate and demand uncertainty. Instead,
high robustness to water shortages in this case study
is achieved through a diversified portfolio of water
augmentation measures that relies on cost-effective
centralized technology for baseload and on rap-
idly deployed, modular technologies that dynamic-
ally respond to droughts. However, flexibility and
robustness increase costs by 60%. Further research
to reduce costs of small scale, decentralized techno-
logy is critical to lower cost of portfolio diversifica-
tion in a changing climate. Additionally, research in
small-scale water treatment technology could critic-
ally enhance urban drought resilience while limiting
overbuilding.
4.2.Climatematters
The drought characteristics of the future climate
we prepare for significantly impact local planning
decisions. In Santa Barbara, the optimal planning
strategy to address long and mild droughts is rad-
ically different than the optimal strategy to address
short intense droughts. Our results show that drought
intensity, not duration or frequency, drives both risk
of deficit during a drought we are not prepared
for, and the regret of overspending on unnecessary
drought measures. These findings underscore the
value in advancing our ability to predict the charac-
teristics of upcoming droughts. While previous work
has explored how to predict the onset of an upcom-
ing drought [ 60, 61], further research is needed to
advance our ability to predict the persistence, fre-
quency, and especially intensity of future droughts.
4.3.Systemrepresentationmatters
The problem of urban water security encompasses
multiple scales from climate, watershed, city, and
ultimately end users. Maintaining high spatial, tem-
poral, technology, and climate fidelity across scales
yields more realistic and implementable water sup-
ply portfolios. Additionally, high-fidelity, multi-
scale and multi-attribute models are more likely
to be trusted and adopted by diverse stakeholders
because the model fidelity matches or exceeds that
used to simulate their sub-systems. While accurate
system representation is important, the strictly tech-
nical DRIPP model does not capture elements of
social preferences and concerns for alternative water
treatment technologies that are rarely captured in
computational water system models. For instance,
recent social science literature has shown that sea-
water desalination plants are often perceived by the
public as very energy intensive and raise concerns
of excessive greenhouse gas emissions [ 2, 62], and
decentralized wastewater treatment systems might
be unpopular due to water quality concerns [ 63].
A planning tool like DRIPP should be accompan-
ied by holistic planning processes that better capture
social and political preferences that inform influence
a water planner’s decision.
4.4.Implicationsfordroughtplanningin
California
Our findings have implications for policymakers,
municipal water planners, and technology providers
in the state of California and beyond. Currently, the
state of California requires water utilities to ensure
preparedness for a design drought of 5 years and an
unprescribed intensity and frequency. Our findings
show that intensity is the primary drought attribute
that influences planning decisions, and determines
the tradeoff between risk and regret of planning for
the wrong drought. While this study focuses on the
city of Santa Barbara, our findings and recommenda-
tions might be generalized to similar drought prone
coastal cities in California. W e recommend policy
makers in the state of California include drought
intensity in the design drought. W e advise municipal
water planners in California to use DRIPP to assess
the value of a diversified water portfolio that includes
centralized technology for a cost-effective baseload
and rapidly deployable, distributed technologies as
a tool for augmenting robustness under drought
uncertainty. Lastly, we recommend that techno-
logy providers advance research in decentralized
and modular technologies with the aim of enabling
municipalities to diversify their water portfolio cost
effectively.
Dataavailabilitystatement
The hydrological data used in this study is pub-
licly available on the USGS National Water Dash-
board https://dashboard.waterdata.usgs.gov/app/
nwd/?region=lower48&aoi=default. The record of
SWP allocation is available at the SWP websitehttps://
water.ca.gov/Programs/State-Water-Project. T echno-
logical data and assumptions used in this project
are the default assumptions built in the WaterTAP3
models. Water reservoirs geomorphological data was
acquired from the US Bureau of Reclamation Pro-
jects and Facilities Database www.usbr.gov/projects/.
Lastly, the City of Santa Barbara’s water distribution
network is considered sensitive information for the
city, and was shared with the authors confidentially.
10
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
Codeavailability
The WaterTAP3 framework used to estimate energy
requirements and costs of alternative treatment train
technologies is available athttps://github.com/NREL/
WaterTAP3. The WNTR framework used to sim-
ulate the urban distribution network is available
at https://github.com/USEPA/WNTR. The planning
policy optimization is based on a wrapper of the
open PTREEOPT code available at https://github.
com/jdherman/ptreeopt. Case study-specific models
and functions are available on the author’s GitHub
(https://github.com/m-zaniolo/DRIPP).
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Alliance
for Water Innovation (NA WI), funded by the U.S.
Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renew-
able Energy Office, Advanced Manufacturing Office
under Funding Opportunity Announcement DE-
FOA-0001905. The views expressed herein do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy or the United States Government.
The research was performed using computational
resources sponsored by the Department of Energy’s
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
and located at the National Renewable Energy Labor-
atory. W e thank Joshua Haggmark, Cathy T aylor, and
Dakota Corey, Water Resources Managers at Santa
Barbara for their help understanding the system.
ORCIDiDs
Marta Zaniolo  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9466-
7102
Sarah Fletcher  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3289-
2237
Meagan S Mauter  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-
4932-890X
References
[1] City of Santa Barbara 2021 Charles E. Meyer desalination
plant (available at: www.santabarbaraca.gov/gov/depts/pw/
resources/system/sources/desalination/default.asp)
[2] Morrow R and Freed H 2020 Water Vision Santa Barbara
Technical Report vol 09
[3] Dai A 2013 Increasing drought under global warming
in observations and models Nat. Clim. Change
3 52–58
[4] Grasham C F , Korzenevica M and Charles K J 2019 On
considering climate resilience in urban water security: a
review of the vulnerability of the urban poor in sub-Saharan
Africa Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Water6 e1344
[5] Zhang X et al 2019 Urban drought challenge to 2030
sustainable development goals Sci. Total Environ.693 133536
[6] Diffenbaugh N S, Swain D L and T ouma D 2015
Anthropogenic warming has increased drought risk in
California Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.112 3931–6
[7] Swain D L, Horton D E, Singh D and Diffenbaugh N S 2016
T rends in atmospheric patterns conducive to seasonal
precipitation and temperature extremes in California Sci.
Adv.2 e1501344
[8] Mauter M S and Fiske P S 2020 Desalination for a circular
water economy Energy Environ. Sci.13 3180–4
[9] Dennig F 2018 Climate change and the re-evaluation of
cost-benefit analysis Clim. Change151 43–54
[10] Borgomeo E, Mortazavi-Naeini M, Hall J W, O’Sullivan M J
and Watson T 2016 T rading-off tolerable risk with climate
change adaptation costs in water supply systems Water
Resour. Res.52 622–43
[11] Lempert R J 2014 Embedding (some) benefit-cost concepts
into decision support processes with deep uncertainty J.
Benefit-Cost Anal.5 487–514
[12] Herman J D, Quinn J D, Steinschneider S, Giuliani M and
Fletcher S 2020 Climate adaptation as a control problem:
review and perspectives on dynamic water resources
planning under uncertainty Water Resour. Res.56 e24389
[13] Zeff H B, Herman J D, Reed P M and Characklis G W 2016
Cooperative drought adaptation: integrating infrastructure
development, conservation and water transfers into adaptive
policy pathways Water Resour. Res.52 7327–46
[14] Haasnoot M, Kwakkel J H, Walker W E and T er Maat J 2013
Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a method for crafting
robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world Glob. Environ.
Change23 485–98
[15] Zeff H B, Kasprzyk J R, Herman J D, Reed P M and
Characklis G W 2014 Navigating financial and supply
reliability tradeoffs in regional drought management
portfolios Water Resour. Res.50 4906–23
[16] Herman J D, Zeff H B, Reed P M and Characklis G W 2014
Beyond optimality: Multistakeholder robustness tradeoffs
for regional water portfolio planning under deep uncertainty
Water Resour. Res.50 7692–713
[17] Gold D F , Reed P M, T rindade B C and Characklis G W 2019
Identifying actionable compromises: Navigating multi-city
robustness conflicts to discover cooperative safe operating
spaces for regional water supply portfolios Water Resour. Res.
55 9024–50
[18] Zaniolo M, Giuliani M, Sinclair S, Burlando P and
Castelletti A 2021 When timing matters-misdesigned dam
filling impacts hydropower sustainability Nat. Commun.
12 1–10
[19] Fletcher S, Strzepek K, Alsaati A and de W eck O 2019
Learning and flexibility for water supply infrastructure
planning under groundwater resource uncertainty Environ.
Res. Lett.14 114022
[20] Herman J D, Zeff H B, Lamontagne J R, Reed P M and
Characklis G W 2016 Synthetic drought scenario generation
to support bottom-up water supply vulnerability
assessments J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage.142 04016050
[21] Fletcher S M, Miotti M, Swaminathan J, Klemun M M,
Strzepek K and Siddiqi A 2017 Water supply infrastructure
planning: Decision-making framework to classify multiple
uncertainties and evaluate flexible design J. Water Resour.
Plan. Manage.143 04017061
[22] Fletcher S, Lickley M and Strzepek K 2019 Learning about
climate change uncertainty enables flexible water
infrastructure planning Nat. Commun.10 1–11
[23] Robert Kasprzyk J, Michael Reed P , Kirsch B R and
Characklis G W 2009 Managing population and drought
risks using many-objective water portfolio planning under
uncertainty Water Resour. Res.45 W12401
[24] Cohen J S, Zeff H B and Herman J D 2020 Adaptation of
multiobjective reservoir operations to snowpack decline in
the western united states J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage.
146 04020091
[25] Liu Y and Mauter M S 2021 Marginal energy intensity of
water supply Energy Environ. Sci.14 4533–40
[26] Liu L, Lopez E, Due nas-Osorio L, Stadler L, Xie Y ,
Alvarez P J J and Li Q 2020 The importance of system
configuration for distributed direct potable water reuse Nat.
Sustainabil.3 548–55
11
Environ. Res. Lett. 18 (2023) 054014 M Zaniolo et al
[27] Lee J and Y ounos T 2018 Sustainability strategies at the
water-energy nexus: Renewable energy and decentralized
infrastructure J. Am. Water Work. Assoc.110 2
[28] Stillwell A S, T womey K M, Osborne R, Greene D M,
Pedersen D W and W ebber M E 2011 An integrated energy,
carbon, water and economic analysis of reclaimed water use
in urban settings: a case study of Austin, T exas J. Water
Reuse. Desal.1 208–23
[29] Cominola A, Spang E S, Giuliani M, Castelletti A, Lund J R
and Loge F J 2018 Segmentation analysis of residential
water-electricity demand for customized demand-side
management programs J. Clean. Prod.172 1607–19
[30] Andrea Cominola K N, Giuliani M, Stewart R A, Maier H R
and Castelletti A 2019 Data mining to uncover
heterogeneous water use behaviors from smart meter data
Water Resour. Res.55 9315–33
[31] Bolorinos J, Ajami N K and Rajagopal R 2020 Consumption
change detection for urban planning: monitoring and
segmenting water customers during drought Water Resour.
Res.56 e2019WR025812
[32] Kavvada O, Nelson K L and Horvath A 2018 Spatial
optimization for decentralized non-potable water reuse
Environ. Res. Lett.13 064001
[33] Kavvada O, Horvath A, Stokes-Draut J R, Hendrickson T P ,
Eisenstein W A and Nelson K L 2016 Assessing location and
scale of urban nonpotable water reuse systems for life-cycle
energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions Environ.
Sci. Technol.50 13184–94
[34] Giuliani M, Quinn J D, Herman J D, Castelletti A and
Reed P M 2017 Scalable multiobjective control for large-scale
water resources systems under uncertainty IEEE Trans.
Control Syst. Technol.26 1492–9
[35] Giuliani M, Castelletti A, Pianosi F , Mason E and Reed P M
2016 Curses, tradeoffs and scalable management: advancing
evolutionary multiobjective direct policy search to improve
water reservoir operations J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage.
142 04015050
[36] Herman J D and Giuliani M 2018 Policy tree optimization
for threshold-based water resources management over
multiple timescales Environ. Modelling Softw.99 39–51
[37] Cohen J S and Herman J D 2021 Dynamic adaptation of
water resources systems under uncertainty by learning
policy structure and indicators Water Resour. Res.
57 e2021WR030433
[38] Borgomeo E, Farmer C L and Hall J W 2015 Numerical
rivers: A synthetic streamflow generator for water resources
vulnerability assessments Water Resour. Res.51 5382–405
[39] The Natural Resources Agency DEPARTMENT OF W ATER
RESOURCES Division of Regional Assistance, Water Use
Efficiency Branch 2021 Urban Water Management Plan
Guidebook 2020 Technical Report
[40] Herman J D, Reed P M, Zeff H B and Characklis G W 2015
How should robustness be defined for water systems
planning under change? J. Water Resour. Plan. Manage.
141 04015012
[41] Lempert R J, Popper S W and Bankes S C 2003 Shaping the
Next One Hundred Y ears: New Methods for Quantitative,
Long-Term Policy Analysis (Science) (Santa Monica, CA:
Rand corporation)
[42] Kasprzyk J R, Nataraj S, Reed P M and Lempert R J 2013
Many objective robust decision making for complex
environmental systems undergoing change Environ.
Modelling Softw.42 55–71
[43] Kwakkel J H, Haasnoot M and Walker W E 2015 Developing
dynamic adaptive policy pathways: a computer-assisted
approach for developing adaptive strategies for a deeply
uncertain world Clim. Change132 373–86
[44] Giuliani M, Zaniolo M, Sinclair S, Micotti M, V an
Orshoven J, Burlando P and Castelletti A 2022 Participatory
design of robust and sustainable development pathways in
the Omo-T urkana river basinJ. Hydrol.41 101116
[45] Vicente-Serrano S M and López-Moreno J I 2005
Hydrological response to different time scales of
climatological drought: an evaluation of the standardized
precipitation index in a mountainous mediterranean basin
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss.9 523–33
[46] Brown C, Ghile Y , Laverty M and Li K 2012 Decision scaling:
Linking bottom-up vulnerability analysis with climate
projections in the water sector Water Resour. Res.
48 W09537
[47] Nazemi A, Wheater H S, Chun K P and Elshorbagy A 2013 A
stochastic reconstruction framework for analysis of water
resource system vulnerability to climate-induced changes in
river flow regime Water Resour. Res.49 291–305
[48] Escriva-Bou A, McCann H, Hanak E, Lund J and Gray B
2016 Accounting for California water Calif. J. Politics Policy
8 3
[49] Miara A, Sitterley K, T almadge M, Huang Z, Evans A,
Stokes-Draut J and Macknick J 2021 Watertap3
documentation (available at: https://github.com/NREL/
WaterTAP3/blob/master/watertap3/watertap3/WaterTAP3_
documentation.pdf)
[50] Bolorinos J, Rajagopal R and Ajami N K 2021 Mining the
gap in long-term residential water and electricity
conservation Environ. Res. Lett.16 024007
[51] Zaniolo M, Giuliani M and Castelletti A 2021
Neuro-evolutionary direct policy search for multiobjective
optimal control IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.
33 5926–38
[52] Zaniolo M, Giuliani M and Castelletti A 2021 Policy
representation learning for multiobjective reservoir policy
design with different objective dynamics Water Resour. Res.
57 e2020WR029329
[53] T rindade B C, Gold D F , Reed P M, Zeff H B and
Characklis G W 2020 Water pathways: an open source
stochastic simulation system for integrated water supply
portfolio management and infrastructure investment
planning Environ. Modelling Softw.132 104772
[54] Matrosov E S, Harou J J and Loucks D P 2011 A
computationally efficient open-source water resource system
simulator–application to London and the thames basin
Environ. Modelling Softw.26 1599–610
[55] de Fraiture C 2007 Integrated water and food analysis at the
global and basin level. an application of W ATERSIMWater
Resour. Manage.21 185–98
[56] Labadie J 2011 Modsim-dss water rights planning water
resources management & river operations decisión support
system Documentation and User Manual (Colorado State
University)
[57] T omlinson J E, Arnott J H and Harou J J 2020 A water
resource simulator in python Environ. Modelling Soft.
126 104635
[58] Clark W C and Harley A G 2020 An integrative framework
for sustainability science Sustainability Science: A Guide for
Researchers
[59] Daigger G T 2007 Wastewater management in the 21st
century J. Environ. Eng.133 671–80
[60] Hao Z, Singh V P and Xia Y 2018 Seasonal drought
prediction: advances, challenges and future prospects Rev.
Geophys.56 108–41
[61] AghaKouchak A, Feldman D, Hoerling M, Huxman T and
Lund J 2015 Water and climate: Recognize anthropogenic
drought Nature524 409–11
[62] Campero C, Harris L M and Kunz N C 2021 De-politicising
seawater desalination: Environmental impact assessments in
the Atacama mining region, chile Environ. Sci. Policy
120 187–94
[63] Gómez-Román C, Sabucedo J-M, Alzate Monica and
Medina B 2021 Environmental concern priming and social
acceptance of sustainable technologies: the case of
decentralized wastewater treatment systems Front. Psychol.
12 647406
12