Impacts of hydraulic structures 
on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication 
in Malaysia 
Sin Poh Lim*1),2) 
 , Fang Yenn Teo* 1) 
 , Christopher Gibbins1) 
 , 
Andy Chan1) 
 , Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 3) 
1) University of Nottingham Malaysia, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Jalan Broga, Semenyih, 43500, Selangor, Malaysia 
2) Global Water Consultants Malaysia, Bandar Tasik Selatan, 57000, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
3) Perbadanan Putrajaya, Environment, Lake & Wetland Division, 62675, Putrajaya, Malaysia 
* Corresponding author 
RECEIVED 13.05.2025 ACCEPTED 19.08.2025 AVAILABLE ONLINE 12.12.2025 
Abstract: Reservoirs serve many essential purposes, including water resource, flood mitigation, recreation, and 
hydropower generation. However, these reservoirs created by constructing hydraulic structures across the waterways 
encounter substantial challenges in water quality. One of the issues is eutrophication, which demands attention in 
reservoir management. This study employs a two-dimensional (2D) depth-averaged hydrodynamic model, utilising 
Delft3D, to analyse the spatial distributions and hydro-environmental processes occurring in Putrajaya Lake, Malaysia. 
The model effectively simulates various scenarios for both dry and wet seasons. Calibration and validation were 
performed using measured data from 72 points within the lake. The water quality modelling focuses on key parameters 
(i.e. phosphate, nitrate, and chlorophyll a). The results indicate higher phosphate concentrations during dry seasons, 
ranging from 0.1 to 0.4 mg∙dm −3, compared to wet seasons, suggesting a higher risk of eutrophication during dry 
seasons. In assessing lake eutrophication, a modified Lamparelli index was developed and adopted to evaluate the lake’s 
eutrophication status. The findings indicate that increasing phosphorus concentration to 0.35 mg∙dm−3 at the upstream 
inflow will likely trigger eutrophication in Putrajaya Lake. We recommend this phosphorus concentration as a critical 
threshold value at all drainage inlets as the best management practice to prevent eutrophication. A detailed assessment 
of water quality can be established from this finding as one of the design criteria for any hydraulic structures that could 
jeopardise water quality, rather than an afterthought. Addressing water quality problems through rehabilitation after 
they arise can be costly and often irreversible. 
Keywords: eutrophication, numerical modelling, Putrajaya, tropical lake, water quality 
INTRODUCTION 
Natural eutrophication is part of the ecological succession where 
lakes evolve from oligotrophic (nutrient-poor) to eutrophic 
(nutrient-rich) states over time (Safwan Miswan et al., 2019). 
Human activities, such as agriculture and urbanisation, signifi-
cantly accelerate eutrophication by increasing nutrient runoff into 
water bodies. In many regions, anthropogenic activities have 
heavily impacted lakes and reservoirs, leading to frequent harmful 
algal blooms (Sulastri, Henny and Susanti, 2020). 
Phosphorus promotes algal blooms that deplete oxygen and 
can create dead zones (Sheela, Letha and Joseph, 2011). During 
blooms, oxygen consumption exceeds production, and the 
breakdown of dead algae further depletes oxygen, risking fish 
and aquatic life mortality (Anda de et al., 2022). Paudel’s et al. 
(2024) study on Ghodaghodi Lake Complex (GLC) and associated 
lakes in Nepal identifies nutrient loading from surrounding 
agriculture and domestic wastes as the lake complex’s most 
pressing eutrophication problem, elevating phosphate while 
lowering dissolved oxygen and threatening aquatic life. Timalsi-
JOURNAL OF WATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
e-ISSN 2083-4535 
Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB) 
JOURNAL OF WATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT 
DOI: 10.24425/jwld.2025.156994 
2025, Special Issue: 64–74 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
na’s et al. (2025) study on Phewa Lake, Nepal identified fertiliser- 
laden agricultural runoff and untreated domestic sewage driven 
nutrients to eutrophic warning levels. 
Eutrophication, particularly in tropical lakes, is an emerging 
concern due to high rainfall, elevated temperatures, and 
uncontrolled nutrient inputs from both point and nonpoint 
sources (Liu et al., 2021), such as agricultural runoff and urban 
discharge (Sperling von, 1997). Putrajaya Lake, a tropical artificial 
lake in Malaysia, has been subject to increasing nutrient 
enrichment, raising concerns about water quality and ecological 
health. Managing eutrophication in such environments requires 
a comprehensive understanding of hydrodynamic flows and 
water quality processes, as these factors directly influence nutrient 
transport and algal dynamics (Sharip et al., 2020). There is no 
specific threshold value of phosphorus concentration established 
yet in monitoring Putrajaya Lake. The objective of this study is to 
establish a threshold value of phosphorus to be adopted in 
monitoring Putrajaya Lake as a preventive action for lake 
eutrophication. 
Various models used in recent studies on lakes and 
reservoirs show that while regions face similar eutrophication 
challenges, different modelling techniques were deployed. In 
Poyang Lake, seasonal changes in nutrient concentration are 
linked to hydrological flows (Li et al., 2018), while Putrajaya 
Lake’s pollution patterns are significantly impacted by high-wind 
events that affect pollutant dispersion (Sharip, Yanagawa and 
Terasawa, 2016). Mokhtar et al. (2020) did not test the lake- 
specific threshold; their findings in Bukit Merah Reservoir 
showed that even modest phosphorus concentrations (e.g., 
0.0158 mg∙dm−3 orthophosphate) were associated with changes 
in chlorophyll a and water quality parameters, supporting the 
sensitivity of lake systems to phosphorus enrichment. Khwair-
akpam’s et al. (2021) study eutrophication risk in Loktak Lake in 
India, focusing on phosphorus concentrations as well, using the 
MIKE 21 ECO Lab model. This study deployed a two-dimen-
sional (2D) numerical modelling approach to investigate the 
spatial distribution of hydrodynamic conditions and water quality 
in Putrajaya Lake. Numerical modelling is a valuable tool that 
complements water quality sampling works, which are often 
limited by high costs and logistical constraints, particularly in 
large water bodies (Ho et al., 2021). By integrating hydrodynamic 
and water quality modelling, this study provides a detailed 
assessment of the lake’s eutrophication status, supporting 
effective lake management strategies. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
STUDY AREA 
Putrajaya Lake was formed by damming Sungai Chuau in 2002, as 
shown in Figure 1. The dam is considered a large dam, with 
a height of from 18 to 30 m and a length of 750 m. It straddles the 
waterway of Sungai Chuau, Sungai Bisa, and three other small 
tributaries to form the lake. The lake has a surface area of 400 ha 
with a 38 km shoreline and 26.5 mln m 3 of water storage (PPJ, 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Fig. 1. Domain of the study area, Putrajaya Lake; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham Malaysia 
Impacts of hydraulic structures on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication in Malaysia 65 
1999; PPJ, 2000). The lake can be divided into three parts for ease 
of discussion, following its features named Putrajaya Lake north 
(PLN), Putrajaya Lake east (PLE), Putrajaya Lake south (PLS) and 
Putrajaya Lake west (PLW) as shown in Figure 1. The PLE starts 
from the Central Wetland overflow weir, which separates the 
wetland upstream and the lake downstream. The weir level is 
23.5 m m.s.l., dropping to a lake level of 21.0 m m.s.l., which is 
controlled by a weir at the dam. The PLW started from Upper 
Bisa weir, which separated the wetland upstream and the lake 
downstream of this area, meeting the PLS at precinct 4. The weir 
level is also at 23.5 m m.s.l., dropping into the lake at 21.0 m m.s.l. 
The PLS covers the main lake area, starting where PLE ends 
toward the southeast before discharging from the lake at the dam 
spillway (Akashah et al., 2015). The PPJ (Ind.: Perbadanan 
Putrajaya) has recorded a long-term water quality monitoring 
program since its lake formation in 2002. The PPJ has provided 
12 years of data from 2010 to 2021 for this research study. Water 
quality measurement and sampling were conducted fortnightly at 
17 stations since the dam was constructed. Catchment changes at 
the upper catchment happen in the early years, and the changes in 
the catchment in recent years are rather minimal. 
NUMERICAL MODELLING 
Numerical modelling was employed in this study to simulate 
the hydrodynamics and eutrophication processes in Putrajaya 
Lake using the Delft3D modelling suite. The methodology 
consisted of two primary components: hydrodynamic modelling 
using Delft3D-FLOW and water quality modelling using Delft3D- 
WAQ (Delft, 2025a; Delft, 2025b). Delft3D-FLOW simulated 
water circulation within Putrajaya Lake, capturing essential 
hydrodynamic parameters such as water levels, current velocities, 
and flow directions. These parameters are critical for under-
standing the movement of nutrients and the dynamics of algal 
growth within the lake (Sharip, Yanagawa and Terasawa, 2016). 
The water quality module, Delft3D-WAQ, was applied to 
model the concentrations of phosphorus and chlorophyll a, 
primary indicators of eutrophication. Additional water quality 
parameters, including temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO), 
ammonia (NH3), nitrate (NO3), phosphate (PO4), pH, biological 
oxygen demand (BOD), and chemical oxygen demand (COD), 
were incorporated to represent the existing environmental 
conditions better. Based on records, the water temperature 
during dry weather is in the order of 30°C, as compared to wet 
weather in the order of 28.5°C. The hydrodynamic outputs from 
Delft3D-FLOW provided boundary conditions for Delft3D- 
WAQ, ensuring a dynamic and accurate representation of water 
quality conditions within the lake (Delft, 2025a; Delft, 2025b). 
MODEL SETUP 
The model of Putrajaya Lake was set up with a computational 
grid, which covers an area of approximately 400 ha and has 
a resolution of 10 × 10 m. The fine grid resolution was necessary 
to capture the complex current field resulting from interactions 
between wind and various structures within the lake. Bathymetric 
data collected in 2011 by PPJ, as shown in Figure 2a, were used to 
set up the model bathymetry. The bathymetry invert level refers 
to the mean sea level as datum, with the lowest value in the 
southern part and the highest value in the northern part. The 
bathymetry data indicated that the southern part is deeper than 
the northern part. For example, the invert level +5 m is deeper 
than the invert level of +30 m. Therefore, in terms of depth in 
Figure 2, the southern part is deeper than the northern part. 
Three open boundaries were defined for the model: the 
inflow from the Central Wetland (CW) weir, the inflow from the 
Upper Bisa (UB) weir, and the downstream boundary represent-
ing the outflow at the Putrajaya dam weir. Water level data for 
these boundaries were sourced from PPJ and applied as input in 
this study. These boundary conditions are crucial for accurately 
Fig. 2. Study area: a) model coverage and bathymetry, b) current measurement points; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham 
Malaysia 
66 Sin Poh Lim, Fang Yenn Teo, Christopher Gibbins, Andy Chan, Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
simulating the hydrodynamic behaviour of the lake and the 
associated water quality processes. The drainage discharge point 
represents drainage inflow to the reservoir, primarily from 
stormwater and surface runoff originating from the surrounding 
urban catchment areas. In the model, this inflow was assumed to 
be constant during each simulation period. 
MODEL CALIBRATION AND VALIDATION 
The numerical model was calibrated and verified by comparing 
the simulated results with the measured water level, current 
speed, and current direction. To achieve this, field measurements 
were carried out in 2021 under dry and wet weather conditions. 
Water level and current data for dry weather were collected in 
September, while wet weather data were obtained in December 
using an acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP). The ADCP 
was deployed at 72 locations across Putrajaya Lake to ensure 
comprehensive spatial coverage to produce an accurate model. 
Figure 2b illustrates the locations of the ADCP measurements. 
Based on the rainfall data recorded at the dam site station, 
Weather Monitoring Station No. 2 (WMS 02), the rainfall 
amount during the dry weather period is 19.8 mm. The average 
rainfall during this month, February 2021, is less than 100 mm, 
which is the driest month. The total 14-day rainfall during the wet 
period is 246.6 mm, which is the wettest month in 2021, the 
highest in December 2021, with an average total monthly rainfall 
of 700 mm. The Manning roughness coefficient was kept constant 
for both dry and wet periods in the simulation. A value of 0.02 
was applied throughout the model domain to represent bottom 
roughness. This value was selected based on literature for similar 
lakebed conditions and was validated during the model calibra-
tion process. The time step adopted in all simulations is 30 s. 
MODEL SCENARIOS 
The study encompassed four distinct simulation cases, as shown in 
Table 1, to evaluate the hydrodynamic and water quality 
characteristics of Putrajaya Lake under varying conditions. Each 
modelling case provided valuable insights into the lake’s behaviour, 
helping to assess its response to different hydrological and climatic 
factors. The water levels in the reservoirs were configured to 
remain constant during the simulation for cases 1 and 2, as there is 
no variation of water level within a single day. For cases 3 and 4, 
the water level at the boundary varies according to the recorded 
water level. Water levels differ between the dry and wet periods. 
During the dry period, the water level at the dam spillway ranges 
from 21 m (which is the spillway crest level) to 21.02 m, 
corresponding to a flow of 0.22 m 3∙s−1 to 1.43 m3∙s−1. During the 
wet period, the water level at the spillway ranges from 20.01 m to 
21.11 m, with a flow range from 0.32 m 3∙s−1 to 46.4 m3∙s−1. 
IMPACT OF PHOSPHORUS ON EUTROPHICATION 
Trophic state indices (TSIs) are widely used tools for assessing 
lake eutrophication by quantifying the trophic state based on 
selected water quality parameters (Alprol et al., 2021; Sui et al., 
2022). Among the various TSIs, the Lamparelli index is regarded 
as the most accurate for representing the trophic state of 
Putrajaya Lake. While this index provides a stable and realistic 
classification, it can be further refined to reflect the specific 
environmental conditions of the lake. To address this, a modified 
version of the Lamparelli index, known as the SPLim trophic state 
index (SPLimTSI), was developed under this study. 
Chlorophyll a (CHL) and phosphorus (P) are the index’s key 
parameters. Phosphorus acts as a nutrient that fuels algal growth, 
thereby influencing chlorophyll a concentrations. The SPLimTSI 
map of Putrajaya Lake for dry and wet weather was established. In 
order to study the impact of phosphorus on eutrophication, 
phosphorus loading at the upstream boundary was varied. This 
helps to identify the threshold at which increased phosphorus 
loading may trigger eutrophication in the lake. Three scenarios 
were simulated, i.e., scenario 1 (P = 0.05 mg∙dm −3), scenario 
2 (P = 0.35 mg∙dm −3), and scenario 3 (P = 0.42 mg∙dm −3). 
Scenario 1 was carried out by starting with a phosphorus 
value following the Putrajaya Lake water quality standard 
(PLWQS) of 0.05 mg∙dm −3. Setting this value also implied that 
the lake should be in a healthy condition in terms of 
eutrophication status. Various values of phosphorus were 
simulated, but only the values of 0.35 and 0.42 mg∙dm −3 are 
presented in this paper, as 0.35 mg∙dm −3 starts to indicate 
eutrophication in some areas, and 0.42 mg∙dm −3 indicates 
extensive eutrophication in the lake. 
The TSI values for Putrajaya Lake were calculated for each 
scenario, and the eutrophication status was evaluated using the 
classification system presented in Table 2. The TSI value is 
computed using the SPLimTSI formula developed under the 
study, as indicated below (Eq. 1), modified based on the 
Lamparelli index. 
Table 1. Model cases 
Model case Description 
Model calibration the goal of this scenario was to ensure that the simulated water levels, current speeds, and directions matched the actual 
conditions observed at the site during wet weather conditions 
Model validation this scenario was run using the calibrated model parameters to validate the simulation results; it was conducted in dry 
weather conditions, and the simulated results were compared with the observed data to verify the model’s accuracy 
Wet weather condi-
tions simulate over a 14-day period to study hydrodynamic characteristics and water quality during wet weather conditions 
Dry weather condi-
tions simulate over a 14-day period to study hydrodynamic characteristics and water quality during dry weather conditions 
Source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham Malaysia. 
Impacts of hydraulic structures on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication in Malaysia 67 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
SPLimTSI¼TSI CHLð Þ þ 0:75TSI Pð Þ
2 ð1Þ
where: SPLimTSI = new index proposed under the study 
(Lamparelli index, SPLim trophic state index), CHL = chlorophyll 
a, P = phosphorus. 
The same TSI classification, as indicated by the Lamparelli 
index in Table 2, was adopted. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
WET WEATHER HYDRODYNAMIC SIMULATION 
Model calibration was essential to ensure the simulation’s 
accuracy in reproducing observed hydrodynamic behaviour. Lake 
hydrodynamic simulation was carried out for wet weather 
conditions on December 09, 2021 and served as model 
calibration. Key parameters such as roughness coefficients and 
eddy viscosity were fine-tuned within acceptable limits to match 
acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) measured data. 
In Figure 3, simulated current speeds and directions are 
shown under wet weather conditions. The colour gradient 
indicates velocity, with blue as the lowest (0 m∙s −1) and dark 
red as the highest (>0.45 m∙s−1). Velocities above 0.3 m∙s−1 appear 
in narrow, shallow upstream channels in Putrajaya Lake east 
(PLE) and most of Putrajaya Lake west (PLW), where the flow 
drops 2.5 m from the Central Wetland weir before heading 
downstream toward the dam. Conversely, velocities decline to 
0.1−0.3 m∙s−1 in deeper regions of Putrajaya Lake south (PLS), 
and to below 0.1 m∙s −1 in fringe areas and the dam’s left flank 
(viewed downstream). High velocities occur upstream of the dam 
spillway, where flow accelerates down from 21 m m.s.l. to 
downstream via the 135 m length labyrinth spillway. 
Flow arrows indicate a dominant north-to-south direction 
from the Central Wetland and Upper Bisa weirs toward the dam 
spillway, driven by increased inflow during wet periods. Local 
recirculation is evident near PLS’s fringes and shallow zones, 
aligning with patterns noted by Sharip, Yanagawa and Terasawa 
(2016). 
In Figure 4, simulated and measured current speeds are 
shown. The model successfully captures the general trend and 
reproduces key peaks and troughs, indicating its ability to simulate 
flow changes due to channel geometry and bathymetry. However, 
it slightly underestimates stations 36–41 and 67–69 speeds, likely 
due to underestimated inflow from nearby drainage discharges. 
The different spikes occasionally at some measurement points are 
mainly due to localised site conditions or activities, which are not 
possible to capture in the numerical model. However, overall, the 
results are within an acceptable magnitude and trend. 
DRY WEATHER HYDRODYNAMIC SIMULATION 
A simulation was conducted under dry weather conditions on 
September 07, 2021, to verify the hydrodynamic model. In 
Figure 5, the current speed and flow direction are shown. While 
Table 2. Lamparelli index, SPLim trophic state index (SPLimTSI) 
classification 
Index SPLimTSI 
Ultraoligotrophic TSI < 47 
Oligotrophic [47; 52) 
Mesotrophic [52; 59) 
Eutrophic [59; 63) 
Supereutrophic [63; 67) 
Hypereutrophic TSI ≥ 67 
Source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham 
Malaysia. 
Fig. 3. Simulated current speed and direction during wet weather 
conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Notting-
ham Malaysia 
Fig. 4. Measured and simulated current speed during wet weather conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham Malaysia 
68 Sin Poh Lim, Fang Yenn Teo, Christopher Gibbins, Andy Chan, Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
the overall velocity pattern is similar to that in wet weather, with 
faster flows in narrow channels and slower flows in wider areas, 
a key difference is observed in the drainage discharge zone, where 
velocities are higher during dry weather. 
This increase is due to reduced external inflows, which shift 
the system’s hydrodynamic balance. Unlike wet weather, when 
stormwater inputs cause broader flow dispersion and lower 
localised velocities, dry conditions reduce water volume and 
lower water levels (Chow, Yusop and Teo, 2016). According to 
the continuity equation (Eq. 2), velocity rises when the cross- 
sectional area narrows, thus increasing flow speed in confined 
channels. 
Q¼A�V ð2Þ
where: Q = volumetric flow rate through a pipe or conduit, 
A = cross-sectional area, V = average fluid velocity. 
In Figure 6, measured and simulated current speeds during 
dry conditions are compared. The model replicates the general 
trend well, accurately reflecting major peaks and troughs. 
However, some discrepancies exist. Notably, simulated speeds 
exceed measured values at stations 1–10 near the confluence of 
flows from the Central Wetland and drainage discharge. These 
differences may stem from field data uncertainty or unaccounted- 
for inflows/outflows in hydraulically complex areas. 
Results indicated that the dry periods showed higher 
differences between the measured and calculated velocity values. 
This could be due to lower current speed during dry periods, with 
a flow range between 0.1 and 0.2 m∙s −1, as compared to wet 
periods of 0.3 and 0.5 m∙s −1. Any local site conditions, such as 
a boat passing through, will create a larger difference during dry 
periods. Overall, the model effectively captures the lake’s 
hydrodynamic behaviour and is considered reliable. The Nash– 
Sutcliffe efficiency (NSE) and root mean square error (RMSE) for 
calibration are 0.72 and 0.047 m∙s −1. While the validation 
model has an NSE of 0.45 and an RMSE of 0.061 m∙s −1, its 
outputs will be integrated into the water quality model to simulate 
phosphorus and chlorophyll a concentrations, which are the 
indicators of eutrophication, enhancing the prediction of nutrient 
dynamics and ecological impacts on Putrajaya Lake. 
STAGNANT FLOW AREAS IN THE LAKE 
It is important to note that although the dam successfully created 
a visually appealing lake with an extensive water surface area 
(Wong et al., 2022), water quality issues are likely to emerge over 
time, particularly in areas with limited flow, as highlighted in 
Figures 1 and 2. The Putrajaya dam design, which only allows 
water to flow downstream at the surface layer of the water column 
from the spillway at elevation 21.0 m m.s.l., results in near- 
stagnant conditions at the bottom layers of the lake, where the 
invert lies around 5.0 m m.s.l. This stratification can lead to 
deterioration in water quality, especially in the lower depths. 
Stagnant water conditions can lead to the accumulation of 
nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, which are often 
derived from agricultural runoff, wastewater, and aquaculture 
activities (Wojewódka-Przybył et al., 2024). These nutrients can 
promote eutrophication, which results in excessive algal blooms 
which deteriorate water quality by depleting oxygen levels and 
releasing toxins (Montero et al., 2021). 
Internal phosphorus recycling (IPR) from the benthic layer 
of a lake system can present significant challenges. Elevated rates 
of IPR can perpetuate eutrophication by continuously supplying 
phosphorus, even after external nutrient inputs are reduced, 
thereby complicating lake restoration efforts (Tay et al., 2022b). 
Since its construction in 2001, Putrajaya Lake has likely 
Fig. 5. Simulated current speed and direction during dry weather 
conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Notting-
ham Malaysia 
Fig. 6. Measured and simulated current speed during dry weather conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University of Nottingham Malaysia 
Impacts of hydraulic structures on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication in Malaysia 69 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
experienced substantial sediment accumulation at its bottom. 
Over time, this deposited sediment, combined with organic 
matter, settles and forms a benthic layer capable of releasing 
phosphorus back into the water column, further exacerbating 
water quality issues. The persistence of IPR can undermine 
restoration efforts, as it may continue to supply phosphorus even 
after external inputs are reduced (Navarrete et al., 2019). The 
subsequent results of the water quality modelling highlight the 
threat of eutrophication to Putrajaya Lake if the nutrient loading 
is uncontrolled. 
WATER QUALITY MODELLING 
Water quality modelling is crucial in understanding the complex 
interactions between physical, chemical, and biological pro-
cesses in aquatic systems. Water quality modelling enables the 
simulation of interactions among nutrients, phytoplankton, and 
dissolved oxygen, capturing the dynamics of eutrophication and 
nutrient cycles in water bodies (Ho et al., 2021). In the context 
of Putrajaya Lake, water quality modelling is essential for 
assessing the impact of various environmental factors on key 
indicators of eutrophication, such as phosphorus and chloro-
phyll a concentrations. 
Phosphate 
Phosphate (PO 4
3−) is an essential nutrient that is crucial in 
eutrophication within aquatic ecosystems. In many freshwater 
systems, phosphate acts as the primary limiting factor for the 
growth of algae and aquatic plants. Elevated phosphate 
concentrations can trigger excessive algal growth, resulting in 
dense algal blooms that reduce water clarity and restrict sunlight 
penetration. This process disrupts submerged aquatic vegetation 
and alters the ecological balance of the water body (Sulastri, 
Henny and Susanti, 2020). 
Water quality modelling was carried out for both dry and 
wet weather conditions. The external phosphorus loading is set as 
a boundary condition at the upstream. While the internal 
phosphorus loads are considered within the model by defining 
parameters related to sediment-water exchange, i.e., release rates 
and equilibrium concentrations. 
In Figure 7, the spatial distribution of phosphate concen-
trations in Putrajaya Lake during dry and wet weather conditions 
is illustrated. The concentration levels, represented by a col-
our gradient, range from low values (blue, approximately 
0.0 mg∙dm −3) to higher concentrations (red, approximately 
0.5 mg∙dm−3). During the simulated dry weather covering 14 days 
from February 1, 2021, to February 14, 2021, phosphate 
accumulation is more pronounced, particularly in upstream 
sections and narrow channel regions, where concentrations range 
between 0.3 and 0.5 mg∙dm −3 (yellow to red zones). This value is 
much higher than the phosphorus concentration value of 
0.05 mg∙dm −3 according to the Putrajaya Lake water quality 
standard (PLWQS). These findings align with those reported by 
Zahari et al. (2018), who studied phosphorus distribution in the 
Putrajaya Wetland and Central Wetland. Their study indicated 
that phosphorus levels in the wetland reached close to 1 mg∙dm −3 
at the highest, while the Central Wetland exhibited lower 
concentrations, ranging from 0 to 0.5 mg∙dm −3. During the dry 
season, reduced water inflow and limited mixing contribute to 
phosphate retention in specific areas. The lack of flushing leads to 
nutrient accumulation, increasing the risk of eutrophication. 
Simulation for 14 days of wet weather conditions from December 
15, 2021, to December 31, 2021, indicated that phosphate 
concentrations are significantly lower, as shown in Figure 7b, 
with most areas showing levels below 0.05 mg∙dm −3 (blue 
regions), which is within the PLWQS limit. 
The most important spatial pattern is that during dry 
weather conditions, phosphate accumulation is more pro-
nounced, particularly in upstream sections of PLW and narrow 
channel regions of PLE, where concentrations range between 0.3 
and 0.5 mg∙dm−3 (yellow to red zones). These results highlighted 
the areas of concern, especially during dry weather conditions. 
Fig. 7. Phosphate (PO4) concentrations during: a) dry weather conditions, b) wet weather conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University 
of Nottingham Malaysia 
70 Sin Poh Lim, Fang Yenn Teo, Christopher Gibbins, Andy Chan, Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Unlike the dry season, where localised phosphate accumula-
tion is evident, the wet season exhibits a more uniform 
distribution with minimal high-concentration zones. Increased 
water inflow and enhanced flushing rates contribute to the 
dilution of phosphate, preventing excessive accumulation. More 
excellent hydrodynamic activity facilitates nutrient dispersion, 
reducing the likelihood of localised eutrophication. 
The above results highlight a higher risk of eutrophication 
during dry weather conditions, especially at the upper part 
of PLE and the middle part of PLW, as shown in Figure 7a. 
Wet weather conditions help mitigate phosphate accumula-
tion through natural dilution, whereas dry periods create 
conditions that favour nutrient retention, increasing eutrophica-
tion risks. 
Chlorophyll a 
High chlorophyll a concentrations are linked to increased total 
phosphorus (TP) and total nitrogen (TN), which are critical 
factors in evaluating eutrophication (Sui et al., 2022). As an 
indicator of algal biomass, high chlorophyll a levels often suggest 
increased phytoplankton activity and eutrophication risks. In 
Figure 8, the spatial distribution of chlorophyll a in Putrajaya 
Lake under dry and wet weather conditions is presented. Colour 
gradients represent concentrations from low (~0 mg∙dm −3, blue) 
to high (~15 mg∙dm −3, red). 
Elevated chlorophyll a levels with values exceeding 
10 mg∙dm−3 are concentrated in upstream sections and narrow 
channels, while downstream areas show lower concentrations. 
Notably, wet and dry weather levels exceed the PLWQS threshold 
of 0.7 mg∙dm−3. 
Hydrodynamic and environmental factors drive this spatial 
pattern. Narrow channels facilitate nutrient build-up due to 
restricted flow, encouraging algal growth. Shallower upstream 
areas allow greater sunlight penetration, further promoting 
photosynthesis. Conversely, expansive and deeper downstream 
regions experience better water mixing and lower light avail-
ability, limiting phytoplankton proliferation. 
Seasonally, chlorophyll a concentrations are higher during 
dry weather. Limited water movement and longer residence times 
in stagnant zones enable algae accumulation. In contrast, the wet 
season brings higher flow and mixing, enhancing flushing and 
reducing algal retention, resulting in lower chlorophyll a levels. 
These findings underscore how hydrodynamics and seasonal flow 
variations influence algal distribution and the potential for 
eutrophication. 
IMPACTS OF PHOSPHORUS ON EUTROPHICATION 
Three scenarios were simulated to evaluate the impact of 
phosphorus on eutrophication in Putrajaya Lake, and the results 
were presented as trophic state index (TSI) maps using the 
SPLimTSI formula (Fig. 9). In scenario 1, the phosphorus 
concentration was set at 0.05 mg∙dm −3 following the PLWQS. 
The value of 0.05 mg∙dm −3 is slightly higher than that of 0.035 
mg∙dm−3 according to the national lake water quality criteria and 
standards (NAHRIM and NRE, 2015). With 0.05 mg∙dm −3 of 
upstream boundary inflow into the lake, the lake remains in 
a healthy state, with ultraoligotrophic conditions (TSI < 47) in the 
upstream area and oligotrophic conditions (TSI 47–51) down-
stream. This suggests balanced nutrient levels, preventing 
excessive algal growth, and the value of 0.05 mg∙dm −3 is suitable 
according to PLWQS. 
At 0.35 mg∙dm −3 phosphorus (scenario 2), where the 
phosphorus modelling shows it can happen during dry weather 
(see Fig. 9), eutrophic conditions expand beyond Upper Bisa to 
stagnant zones in the lower reaches of the lake. Areas near 
drainage outlets, curved riverbanks, and narrow channels with 
restricted flow show increased phosphorus accumulation, exacer-
bating eutrophication risks. To mitigate this, phosphorus loading 
should be limited to 0.35 mg∙dm −3 at all drainage inlets. 
Fig. 8. Chlorophyll a concentration during: a) dry weather conditions, b) wet weather conditions; source: Global Water Consultants and University of 
Nottingham Malaysia 
Impacts of hydraulic structures on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication in Malaysia 71 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
In the worst-case scenario (scenario 3), where 0.42 mg∙dm −3 
phosphorus concentration reaches 0.42 mg∙dm −3, nearly the 
entire lake transitions to eutrophic conditions, posing severe risks 
to water quality. This level of nutrient enrichment exceeds the 
lake’s capacity to assimilate phosphorus, increasing the likelihood 
of algal blooms and oxygen depletion. External phosphorus 
loading (EPL) is primarily from industrial effluents, agricultural 
runoff, and urban sewage, contributing significantly to lake 
nutrient enrichment. The interplay between EPL and internal 
phosphorus recycling (IPR) creates complex dynamics that 
require careful management. High IPR can lead to unexpected 
increases in algal concentrations and reduce the resilience of lakes 
(Tay et al., 2022a). Effective phosphorus control strategies to 
control EPL and IPL are crucial to prevent such deterioration. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The simulation results reveal a strong link between phosphorus 
loading and eutrophication in Putrajaya Lake, highlighting the 
need for proactive phosphorus management. 
At a baseline concentration of 0.05 mg∙dm −3, the lake 
remains in an oligotrophic state, indicating that natural flushing 
and nutrient cycling effectively regulate phosphorus levels. At 
0.35 mg∙dm−3, eutrophic conditions expand into stagnant zones, 
where limited water circulation exacerbates nutrient accumula-
tion. These high-risk areas require mitigation measures such as 
improved water exchange and localised nutrient management to 
prevent further deterioration. In the worst-case scenario 
(0.42 mg∙dm −3), widespread eutrophication severely degrades 
Fig. 9. Trophic state index maps under different phosphorus (P) 
loading scenarios: a) P = 0.05 mg∙dm −3, b) P = 0.35 mg∙dm −3, c) P = 
0.42 mg∙dm−3; source: Global Water Consultants and University of 
Nottingham Malaysia 
72 Sin Poh Lim, Fang Yenn Teo, Christopher Gibbins, Andy Chan, Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
water quality, increasing the likelihood of harmful algal blooms 
and oxygen depletion. To prevent this, phosphorus levels should 
be maintained below 0.30 mg∙dm −3, with stricter controls in 
stagnant zones and inflow points. 
This study presents an innovative approach for managing 
phosphorus loading and mitigating eutrophication in tropical 
lakes through numerical modelling techniques. While the 
approach was applied to Putrajaya Lake, its methodology is 
adaptable to other tropical lakes by calibrating site-specific 
hydrodynamic and nutrient parameters. The findings highlight 
the critical role of proactive phosphorus management in 
maintaining lake water quality and preventing eutrophication. 
Compared with other trophic state indices (TSI), the new index 
developed under the study (SPLimTSI) provides a more accurate 
assessment of the trophic state for Putrajaya Lake and is 
recommended for adoption in the Putrajaya Lake assessment. 
The index is also recommended for use in other lakes or 
reservoirs in Malaysia and other tropical lakes. By using this 
index, lake managers and environmental agencies can more 
accurately assess the trophic status of their water bodies. 
It is also recommended that policymakers or lake managers 
establish the threshold value of their lake based on the same 
approaches. Immediate action to control the inflow of the 
identified critical water quality parameters is required by 
installing gross pollutant traps (GPTs) at drainage inlets to the 
lake as one of the practical control measures. Nutrient reduction 
is the most urgent control measure. It is also recommended that 
wetlands be installed along the lake shoreline to filter nonpoint 
sources of pollutants from entering the lake via surface runoff. 
The research highlights that the configuration of the 
hydraulic structures is critical in preventing the deterioration of 
water quality in a man-made reservoir. It is essential to conduct 
detailed and comprehensive water quality modelling to assess the 
potential risk of eutrophication during the study and design 
stages. Further research is needed on the internal phosphorus 
loading impact, the influence of water temperature, the benthic 
layer, longer simulation periods and mitigation measures, etc. 
Other possible confounding factors, such as catchment manage-
ment, inflow variability, and unmonitored input sources, should 
also be considered in the research. 
Water quality should be addressed in the early stages of the 
design process and included as a key design criterion for hydraulic 
structures, rather than being considered an afterthought, since post- 
construction rehabilitation work is often costly and irreversible. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank Perbadanan Putrajaya (PPJ), Malaysia, for 
providing the necessary data for this research study. 
FUNDING 
Global Water Consultants funded this research study together 
with the University of Nottingham Malaysia. 
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS 
All authors declare that they have no conflict of interests. 
REFERENCES 
Akashah, M. et al. (2015) Biodiversity in an urban ecosystem: Putrajaya 
Lake and Wetland. Putrajaya: Perbadanan Putrajaya. 
Alprol, A.E. et al. (2021) “Assessment of water quality, eutrophication, 
and zooplankton community in lake Burullus, Egypt,” Diversity, 
13(6), 268. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/d13060268. 
Anda de, J. et al. (2022) “Seasonal and long-term behavior of TN:TP 
ratio in Lake Cajititlán and its environmental implications,” 
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 233(3). Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11270-022-05566-0. 
Chow, M.F., Yusop, Z. and Teo, F.Y. (2016) “Evaluation of stormwater 
runoff quality during monsoon and inter-monsoon seasons at 
tropical urban catchments,” International Journal of River Basin 
Management. 14, pp. 75–82. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
15715124.2015.1082479. 
Delft (2025a) Delft3D-Flow user manual. Delft: Deltares. 
Delft (2025b) Delft3D-WAQ – Technical Reference manual. Delft: 
Deltares. 
Ho, H. et al. (2021) “Numerical study of hydro-environmental 
processes of Poyang Lake subject to engineering control,” 
Hydrology Research, 52(3), pp. 760–786. Available at: https:// 
doi.org/10.2166/nh.2021.184. 
Khwairakpam, E. et al. (2021) “Water quality assessment of Loktak 
Lake, Northeast India using 2-D hydrodynamic modelling,” SN 
Applied Sciences, 3(4), 422. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s42452-021-04440-8. 
Li, B. et al. (2018) “Hydrodynamic and water quality modeling of 
a large floodplain lake (Poyang Lake) in China,” Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research, 25(35), pp. 35084–35098. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-3387-y. 
Liu, W. et al. (2021) “Risk assessment of non-point source pollution 
based on landscape pattern in the Hanjiang River basin, China,” 
Environment Science and Pollution Research, 28, pp. 64322– 
64336. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-15603-w. 
Mokhtar, M.Z. et al. (2020) “Water quality assessment of Bukit Merah 
Reservoir, Malaysia using mathematical modeling,” IOP Con-
ference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 535(1), 012023. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/535/1/012023. 
Montero, E. et al. (2021) “Seasonal variation of Microcystis aeruginosa 
and factors related to blooms in a deep warm monomictic lake in 
Mexico,” Journal of Limnology, 80(2). Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.4081/JLIMNOL.2021.2013. 
NAHRIM and NRE (2015) National lake water quality criteria and 
standards. Seri Kembangan: National Hydraulic Research In-
stitute of Malaysia Ministry of Natural Resources and Environ-
ment. 
Navarrete, I.A. et al. (2019) “Towards integrated management of 
a shallow tropical lake: assessment of water quality, sediment 
geochemistry, and phytoplankton diversity in Lake Palakpakin, 
Philippines,” Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 191(8), 
485. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7617-7. 
Paudel, G. et al. (2024) “Hydrochemical dynamics and water quality 
assessment of the Ramsar-listed Ghodaghodi Lake complex: 
Unveiling the water-environment nexus,” Water (Switzerland), 
16(23), 3373. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/w16233373. 
PPJ (1999) Putrajaya lake management guide. Putrajaya: Perbadan 
Putrajaya. 
PPJ (2000) Catchment development and management plan for Putrajaya 
Lake, Putrajaya. Putrajaya: Perbadan Putrajaya. 
Safwan Miswan, M. et al. (2019) “Preliminary assessment of Teknologi 
lake quality status at Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia 
(UTHM) campus in Parit Raja, Johor, Malaysia,” IOP Conference 
Impacts of hydraulic structures on lake water quality deterioration and eutrophication in Malaysia 73 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 601(1), 012013. 
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/601/1/012013. 
Sharip, Z. et al. (2020) “Application of an effective microorganism 
product as a cyanobacterial control and water quality improve-
ment measure in Putrajaya Lake, Malaysia,” Earth Systems and 
Environment, 4(1), pp. 213–223. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s41748-019-00139-4. 
Sharip, Z., Yanagawa, R. and Terasawa, T. (2016) “Eco-hydrodynamic 
modelling of Chini Lake: Model description,” Environmental 
Modeling and Assessment, 21(2), pp. 193–210. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10666-015-9464-4. 
Sheela, A.M., Letha, J. and Joseph, S. (2011) “Environmental status of 
a tropical lake system,” Environmental Monitoring and Assess-
ment, 180(1–4), pp. 427–449. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/s10661-010-1797-5. 
Sperling von, E. (1997) “The process of biomass formation as the key 
point in the restoration of tropical eutrophic lakes,” in L. Kufel, 
A. Prejs and J.I. Rybak (eds.) Shallow Lakes ’95. Developments in 
Hydrobiology, 119. Dordrecht: Springer. Available at: https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-94-011-5648-6_36. 
Sui, Q. et al. (2022) “Seasonal water quality changes and the 
eutrophication of Lake Yilong in southwest China,” Water 
(Switzerland), 14(21), 3385. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
w14213385. 
Sulastri, S., Henny, C. and Susanti, E. (2020) “Phytoplankton 
composition and abundance in the floating treatment wetlands 
(FTWs) system of Lake Maninjau, Indonesia,” IOP Conference 
Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 535(1), 012014. Avail-
able at: https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/535/1/012014. 
Tay, C.J. et al. (2022a) “Internal phosphorus recycling promotes rich 
and complex dynamics in an algae-phosphorus model: Implica-
tions for eutrophication management,” Journal of Theoretical 
Biology, 532, 110913. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi. 
2021.110913. 
Tay, C.J. et al. (2022b) “Assessing the role of internal phosphorus 
recycling on eutrophication in four lakes in China and Malaysia,” 
Ecological Informatics, 72, 101830. Available at: https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ecoinf.2022.101830. 
Timalsina, R. et al. (2025) “An assessment of seasonal water quality in 
Phewa Lake, Nepal, by integrating geochemical indices and 
statistical techniques: A sustainable approach,” Water (Switzer-
land), 17(2), 238. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/w170 
20238. 
Wojewódka-Przybył, M. et al. (2024) “Exploring spatial dynamics of 
water quality in a tropical lake affected by aquaculture,” Water 
(Switzerland), 16(21), 3079. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
w16213079. 
Wong, C.F. et al. (2022) “Hazard identification risk assessment and risk 
control (HIRARC) for Mengkuang Dam construction,” Civil 
Engineering and Architecture, 10(3), pp. 762–770. Available at: 
https://doi.org/10.13189/cea.2022.100302. 
Zahari, N.M. et al. (2018) “The study of phosphorus distribution at 
Putrajaya Wetland,” IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and 
Engineering, 342(1), 012092. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
1757-899X/342/1/012092. 
74 Sin Poh Lim, Fang Yenn Teo, Christopher Gibbins, Andy Chan, Tengku Marzuki Tengku Ismail 
© 2025. The Authors. Published by Polish Academy of Sciences (PAN) and Institute of Technology and Life Sciences – National Research Institute (ITP – PIB). 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)