Anthropogenic impacts on the nitrate pollution in an urban river: Insights from a combination of natural-abundance and paired isotopes 
 
 
 
 
 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples are advised the Griffith Research Online collection may contain images, voices and names of people who are deceased. Some language and materials may be considered inappropriate, reflecting the views of the period in which it was produced. While this language has been retained to preserve historical context, these are not the views of Griffith University. 
Request item review: https://www.griffith.edu.au/library/about/culturally-respectful#item-review. Log In Communities & Collections All of GRO More Information Contact Us Home Griffith Research Online Journal articles Anthropogenic impacts on the nitrate pollution in an urban river: Insights from a combination of natural-abundance and paired isotopes 
 Metadata only Anthropogenic impacts on the nitrate pollution in an urban river: Insights from a combination of natural-abundance and paired isotopes 
 No Thumbnail Available File version Author(s) Guo, W Zhang, D Zhang, W Li, S Pan, K Jiang, H Zhang, Q Griffith University Author(s) Zhang, Quanfa Primary Supervisor Other Supervisors Editor(s) Date 2023 Size File type(s) Location License Abstract Urban rivers are often characterized by high nitrate (NO3−) loadings. High NO3− loadings cause water quality and ecological damages, which undermines the sustainable development of cities. To date, the drivers of these high NO3− loadings remain unclear. This study, for the first time, integrated natural-abundance isotopes (δ15 N/δ18O–NO3− and δD/δ18O–H2O) and 15N-pairing techniques to comprehensively reveal the anthropogenic impacts on the NO3− pollution in an urban river. Natural-abundance isotopes suggested that in both the wet and dry seasons, the NO3− was predominantly from the conservative mixing of different sources, and biological NO3− removal was minor. The 15N-pairing experiments supported the natural-abundance isotope data, quantitatively showing that in-soil nitrification was prevailing, while NO3− removal processes (denitrification, anammox, and dissimilatory NO3− reduction to ammonium) were weak. A Bayesian isotope-mixing model showed that soil sources (soil organic nitrogen and chemical fertilizer) dominated the NO3− in the upper reaches, while in the lower reaches, the impermeable riparian zone short-circuited the access of soils to the river. Here, the wastewater treatment plants became a significant source of NO3−. This study quantitatively revealed the drivers of high NO3− loadings in an urban river, and generated important clues for effective NO3− pollution control and remediation in urban rivers. 
 Show more Journal Title Journal of Environmental Management 
 Conference Title Book Title Edition Volume 333 
 Issue Thesis Type Degree Program School Publisher link DOI 10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.117458 Patent number Funder(s) Grant identifier(s) Rights Statement Rights Statement Item Access Status Note Access the data Related item(s) Subject Persistent link to this record https://hdl.handle.net/10072/432078 Citation Guo, W; Zhang, D; Zhang, W; Li, S; Pan, K; Jiang, H; Zhang, Q, Anthropogenic impacts on the nitrate pollution in an urban river: Insights from a combination of natural-abundance and paired isotopes, Journal of Environmental Management, 2023, 333, pp. 117458 
 Collections Journal articles Full item page Privacy Statement Copyright matters CRICOS Provider - 00233E TEQSA: PRV12076 Gold Coast Logan Brisbane - Queensland, Australia First Peoples of Australia