Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-026-02618-7
Diagnosing Barriers to California Bay-Delta Wetland Restoration
Implementation: Extending the Adaptation Perspective
Kyra Gmoser-Daskalakis 1,3 ● Mark Lubell 2 ● Gwen Arnold 2
Received: 9 April 2026 / Accepted: 28 August 2026 / Published online: 11 September 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Climate adaptation increasingly considers wetland restoration as a nature-based solution to reduce ﬂood risk and provide co-
beneﬁts such as species protection, water resource management, and public recreation access. However, barriers must be
identiﬁed and overcome to increase the pace and scale of wetland restoration for adaptive bene ﬁts. We argue existing climate
adaptation barriers frameworks insuf ﬁciently address physical and ecological barriers that become apparent during on-the-
ground implementation of wetland restoration projects. This paper diagnoses barriers to wetland restoration projects in the
California Bay-Delta Estuary via semi-structured interviews with 59 project developers and regional restoration
policymakers, funders, and managers across nine case study projects. Findings suggest common challenges emerge around
conﬂicts among regulatory authorities and insuf ﬁcient funding for post-project stewardship. We recommend potential
solutions to address key barriers and increase the pace of wetland restoration. Adaptation in developed coastal estuaries
worldwide increasingly requires nature-based solutions like wetland restoration; such a framework is imperative to diagnose
barriers and identify interventions that can increase investment in these complex social-ecological systems.
Introduction
As climate change impacts accelerate, particularly increased
ﬂooding and sea level rise, policymakers and scientists push
for nature-based solutions as adaptation (Gupta et al. 2024;
Chausson et al. 2020; van Rees et al. 2024). Nature-based
solutions (NbS) use natural processes and features to address
societal challenges like climate change and provide social
and environmental bene ﬁts (IUCN 2016). Wetland restora-
tion recovers destroyed or damaged wetland habitat (Sapkota
et al. 2018); it is a type of NbS because restoration actions
create habitat to provide climate adaptation (e.g., ﬂood pro-
tection, sea level rise adaptation), biodiversity, water quality,
carbon sequestration, and recreation (de Groot et al. 2018).
Regional, national, and global environmental plans and
policies now require or encourage wetland restoration as a
climate adaptation NbS (Hettiarachi et al. 2015; Goals Pro-
ject 2015; Exec. Order No. 14008 2021).
Despite this policy emphasis, the pace of restoration is
insufﬁcient to meet policy goals or even offset continued
wetland loss in U.S estuaries (Gittman et al. 2019). To
accelerate the pace of wetland restoration, we need to
diagnose the barriers to implementation and develop policy
recommendations. This problem motivates this paper ’s
research question: what are the main barriers to imple-
menting wetland restoration projects as NbS solutions? We
argue that the two strands of existing literature that target
this question have not provided suf ﬁcient answers, for dif-
ferent reasons.
The ﬁrst strand of research is case studies of speci ﬁc
wetland restoration (Bell-James 2022; Clare and Creed
2022; Sayles 2018) and nature-based solutions programs
(Raska et al. 2022; Sanchez-Arcilla et al. 2022; Stewart-
Sinclair et al. 2020; Tuihedur Rahman et al. 2021). While
the case study literature documents barriers for speci ﬁc
projects or locations, it has not developed a generalizable
approach that can then be applied to future cases. The
second strand is general frameworks for classifying barriers
to climate adaptation actions (Biesbroek et al. 2013; Moser
* Kyra Gmoser-Daskalakis
k.s.gmoser-daskalakis@uu.nl
1 Work Primarily Conducted At: Department of Environmental
Science & Policy, University of California Davis, Davis, CA, USA
2 Department of Environmental Science & Policy, University of
California Davis, Davis, CA, USA
3 Present address: Copernicus Institute of Sustainable Development,
Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
& Ekstrom 2010). These general barriers frameworks are
insufﬁcient because they mostly focus on regional policy or
planning activities and do not adequately account for on-
the-ground realities of implementing projects that func-
tionally achieve adaptation goals. Further, few studies
propose solutions to identi ﬁed barriers (Sayles 2018; Deely
et al. 2020; Bataille et al. 2023; Schultz et al. 2019; Moser
and Ekstrom 2010). In other words, general barriers fra-
meworks do not delve deeply enough into the imple-
mentation process.
To address this conceptual problem, we integrate and
adapt two climate adaptation barriers frameworks to incor-
porate physical and ecological site conditions. Our approach
diagnoses barriers and illuminates solutions to accelerate
implementation, providing lessons for estuaries worldwide
with wetland restoration policy goals. We apply our fra-
mework to the case of the California Bay-Delta (Bay-Delta),
a highly-developed estuary where policymakers have long
sought to restore the 85-90% of wetlands lost to agriculture
and development (USGS 2017; Orr 2018), and now pursue
wetlands restoration as a nature-based solution to climate
change impacts like coastal ﬂooding and sea level rise
(Goals Project 2015; Bay Adapt 2021; SFBRA 2023).
Regional plans set ambitious restoration targets (i.e.,
100,000 tidal marsh acres in the Bay, 60 –80,000 habitat
acres in the Delta) (Goals Project 2015; DSC 2022). We
identify barriers and potential solutions to Bay-Delta wet-
land restoration using interviews with developers of nine
case study projects and regional restoration actors who
shape the local context. We ﬁnd key barriers from reg-
ulatory con ﬂicts, on-site constraints, and funding.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We
set the stage for the analysis by describing the evolution of
wetland restoration from ecological goals to climate adap-
tation in our case, the Bay-Delta estuary. We then provide
an analysis of the existing literature and propose an
Fig. 1 Bay-Delta Counties with Existing Wetland Habitat per CA Nature Habitat and Land Cover Designation (CA Department of Technology
2024, CEC 2024)
308 Page 2 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
analytical framework for diagnosing barriers that addresses
the gap in existing research. The method section describes
how we qualitatively code key informant interviews from
nine Bay-Delta wetland restoration projects to diagnose key
implementation barriers, which provides the basis for
potential solutions outlined in the discussion section.
Background: From Wetland Restoration to
Climate Adaptation
The Bay-Delta estuary extends from the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta, where freshwater ﬂows through the brackish
Suisun Marsh, out to saline San Francisco Bay (Fig. 1). The
Bay-Delta is formed by the convergence of Sacramento and
San Joaquin rivers, which receive water from the Sierra
Nevada mountains. The estuary provides critical species
habitat, water resources for much of the state, and extensive
urban development and agricultural production (U.S. EPA
2021; State Water Board 2018). The Bay and Delta have
complex and overlapping local, state, and federal authorities
with competing goals for water, habitat, and development
(Lubell et al. 2013).
For at least 50 years, project developers have pursued
wetland restoration in the Bay-Delta (Orr 2018). The 1965
federal McAteer-Petris Act limited ﬁlling of San Francisco
Bay wetlands. The Clean Water Act established compen-
satory mitigation requirements, leading to increased marsh
restoration in the 1980s –1990s (Orr 2018). The complexity
and size of wetland restoration projects have grown over
time; ongoing restoration represents a mix of voluntary
projects and legally-required mitigation to offset habitat loss
and environmental impacts of other activities (Callaway et
al. 2011; Orr 2018).
Bay-Delta restoration is increasingly motivated by cli-
mate adaptation goals for ﬂooding and sea level rise.
Updates to Baylands habitat restoration goals added sea
level rise considerations (Goals Project 2015) and more
recent Bay-Delta climate adaptation plans (Bay Adapt 2021;
DSC 2022) and restoration funding guidelines (SFBRA
2023) frame wetland restoration as a climate adaptation
NbS. Wetlands buffer storm surges and reduce peak ﬂows,
providing ﬂood protection alongside other co-bene ﬁts
(Saleh and Weinstein 2016; Chausson et al. 2020; Tuihe-
dur Rahman et al. 2021).
Yet wetland restoration remains insuf ﬁcient to achieve
regional targets. Separate plans in the estuary call for
100,000 acres of tidal marsh restoration in the Bay (Goals
Project 2015), 5 –7000 acres of tidal restoration in the Sui-
sun Marsh (SMP 2013), and 60 –80,000 acres of Delta
habitat restoration (DSC 2022). Meeting these goals of up
to 187,000 restored acres requires signi ﬁcant increase in
current restoration; only 16,400 acres of Bay tidal
restoration occurred from 1998 to 2020 (WRMP et al. 2025)
and 13,758 acres of Delta wetland restoration is completed
or in-progress from 2007 –2023 (Austin 2023). Identifying
barriers to implementation and potential solutions is
essential to increase the pace of restoration. We next con-
sider how existing climate adaptation barriers frameworks
apply to wetland restoration.
Theoretical Background: Barriers to Wetland
Restoration
Wetland restoration research faces a conceptual dilemma;
on the one hand, individual case studies that consider site-
level barriers in implementation have not been synthesized
into a generalizable framework that applies broadly. On the
other hand, replicable frameworks based in climate adap-
tation literature do not adequately incorporate project-scale
considerations (OnlineResource1).
Previous studies examine governance barriers in coastal
NbS (Dawson et al. 2017; Sayles 2018; Tait & Brunson
2022; Velez et al. 2018; Raska et al. 2022; Stewart-Sinclair
et al. 2020; Cortina-Segarr et al. 2021; Sanchez-Arcilla
et al. 2022; Bell-James 2022; Bell-James et al. 2023). Each
study identi ﬁes barriers with its own classi ﬁcation system,
often focused on higher-scale governance and planning with
less attention to on-the-ground implementation. Fewer stu-
dies on barriers to NbS or wetland restoration integrate
project and regional scales, though some consider legal and
land ownership barriers alongside ﬁnancial, technical, and
governance barriers (Bell-James 2022; Cortina-Segarr et al.
2021; Raska et al. 2022). Sayles ( 2018) uses interviews to
understand barriers in wetland restoration at the regional-
and project-level over time (for Puget Sound, Washington).
Clare & Creed ( 2022) identify barriers to wetland restora-
tion on private lands in Alberta, Canada and ﬁnd barriers
from interactions of environmental, social, economic, and
political factors on-the-ground. We respond to their call to
focus more on restoration practitioners.
Generalizable frameworks e xist, but lack this focus on
project-scale interactions of s ocial, environmental, and poli-
tical factors. Biesbroek et al. ( 2013) and Moser and Ekstrom
(2010) are two replicable, generali zable frameworks for clas-
sifying climate adaptation barriers. Biesbroek et al. ( 2013)
deﬁne barriers as factors or conditions perceived to negatively
affect adaptation processe s or outputs. They outline ﬁve
categories for climate adaptation barriers: Cognitive, Financial,
Informational, Institutional, and Social. They ﬁnd the adapta-
tion literature most commonly identi ﬁes institutional and
social barriers; Biesbroek et al. ( 2013) does not include a
category for physical or ecological conditions. Another blue-
green infrastructure barriers framework does include on-site
limitations, but does not consider temporal or spatial scales of
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 3 of 17 308
actors and project processes (Deely et al. 2020). The temporal
and spatial nature of restoration creates unique barriers; pro-
jects take place over long periods of time in varying locations
with both site-speciﬁc and landscape-level social and ecolo-
gical factors. Moser and Ekstrom ( 2010) diagnose barriers to
climate adaptation by identif ying the spatial and temporal
scales at which barriers originate. Existing barriers frameworks
each have shortcomings in tran slating to restoration; they
either fail to account for physical and ecological conditions or
the spatial and temporal scales i nvolved in project processes.
To address both the lack of generalizable frameworks in
wetland-speciﬁc barrier studies and the insuf ﬁcient treat-
ment of restoration realities in generalizable adaptation
barriers frameworks, we integrate and update the Biesbroek
et al. ( 2013) and Moser and Ekstrom ( 2010) frameworks for
wetland restoration. In our framework, a barrier to a wetland
restoration project is categorized by what the barrier is
(type, subtype) and where (spatial origin) and when (tem-
poral origin) it emerges relative to the project (Fig. 2). Our
additions of a physical/environmental barrier type and a
future temporal origin better capture site-speci ﬁc realities
that constrain restoration implementation. This framework
can help identify solutions to increase wetland restoration
implementation to meet policy goals.
Data and Methods
To analyze wetland restoration barriers in the Bay-Delta, we
conducted semi-structured interviews with partners of nine
projects and regional actors (policymakers, funders,
program managers) who fund, regulate, or implement wet-
land restoration.
Case Study Project Selection
We select projects from EcoAtlas, an online database of
environmental projects across California recognized as the
region’s most comprehensive inventory of restoration
(CWMW 2024). Each project entry contains —where pro-
vided by partners or database managers —project location,
type, status, size, habitat, and budget, and the organizations
funding or implementing the project 1. After ﬁltering for
entries within Bay-Delta counties (Fig. 1), we selected nine
projects for suf ﬁcient diversity and coverage across geo-
graphic location, years, project partners, size, habitat, and
funding sources. These projects cover over 25,000 acres and
count toward current regional targets (WRMP et al. 2025,
Austin 2023). Conversations with four regional experts (two
Bay, two Delta) con ﬁrmed the cases are a representative
sample of Bay-Delta wetland restoration.
The nine case studies span the Bay (6) and the Delta (3)
(Fig. 3, OnlineResource2 for case details). One project is in
initial planning/design stages (E) with two ongoing (i.e.,
partial implementation) (A, F), and six completed (B, C, D,
Fig. 2 Framework to Diagnose Barriers to Wetland Restoration
1 Certain agencies require project entries in EcoAtlas as a condition of
permit approval or funding. Several regional planning entities encou-
rage and support other project developers to voluntarily enter their
projects in EcoAtlas. EcoAtlas managers enter historic projects into the
database. Conversations with regional experts and EcoAtlas managers
conﬁrmed data quality and coverage is suf ﬁcient for sampling
purposes.
308 Page 4 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
G, H, J). Seven projects are voluntary (B, C, D, E, F, G, H)
and two were built for mitigation requirements (A, J). Three
are brown ﬁeld sites of former industrial or military use (C,
D, F). Four sites restore former farmland (A, B, G, H). Site J
converted managed wetlands for duck hunting to tidal
wetland. Site H involves multiple related projects across
two sites for subsidence reversal, carbon sequestration,
levee improvement and habitat. The ﬁrst author toured four
case study sites in-person (C, E, F, G) and conducted
background research of public project documents for project
information. Internet searches of project names identi ﬁed
project documents (environmental review, monitoring or
feasibility studies, adaptive management plans), news
stories, blogs, project websites, presentations (conferences,
public meetings), and regional plans/reports.
Semi-Structured Interviews
Interview questions asked about project bene ﬁts, goals,
timelines, collaboration, and barriers (OnlineResource3).
Project partner participants held roles directly related to
project implementation: project managers, engineers/
designers, biologists/scientists, construction managers, and
community outreach specialists. Regional actors included
funders, politicians, policy coordinators, and environmental
program managers. Initial participant identi ﬁcation used
EcoAtlas (each project entry contains 2 –3 contacts) fol-
lowed by snowball sampling. We sent 76 requests 2 and
conducted 56 interviews with 59 participants 3 in two waves
(September 2023 –February 2024, July-December 2024).
Participants provided informed oral consent consistent with
human subjects ethics approval granted by UC Davis
Institutional Review Board (#2008937-1). Four to seven
participants represented each project; an additional 14
interviews with regional restoration actors do not tie to a
speciﬁc project. Of the 59 participants, 23 work in the Delta
and 36 in the Bay (Table 1). Participants represent the
diversity of governmental, non-governmental, and private
organizations involved in wetland restoration.
Interviews lasted 25 –71 min (Average: 43 min) on Zoom
videoconferencing (44 interviews), in-person (5) and by
phone (7). Zoom transcribed online interviews while
Otter.AI transcribed phone and in-person recordings. The
ﬁrst author and a student assistant cleaned all transcripts for
accuracy.
Barrier Statement Coding and Analysis
Review of each interview transcript identi ﬁed statements
meeting the Biesbroek et al. ( 2013)d e ﬁnition of a barrier
(factors or conditions the participants perceived to nega-
tively affect the process or its success). The ﬁrst author
manually selected and coded 829 barrier statements 4 in
Atlas.ti software (the software only facilitated exporting
codes for analysis). Most barrier statements resulted from
one interview question: What were the main barriers you
experienced on the project 5? But transcripts were reviewed
for statements in full because participants mentioned bar-
riers throughout interviews (OnlineResource3). Statements
Fig. 3 Map of Case Study
Projects
2 Each contact received 3 emails (1 + week apart) until labeled non-
respondent; of 11 non-respondents, nine never replied, two refused due
to schedule constraints, and six declared themselves insuf ﬁciently
related to the cases (four referred us to other staff who responded).
3 Three interviews were conducted with two people each when two
staff members from the same organization worked together and were
interviewed together.
4 The author looked for keywords such as ‘barrier’, ‘challenge’,
‘frustration’, ‘issue’, ‘problem’, ‘struggle’ in relation to the restoration
process.
5 For regional actors (i.e., funders, policymakers, program managers)
this question was, “What are the major barriers you experienced
completing or supporting wetland restoration in the region? ”.
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 5 of 17 308
and codes were merged with participant and case study
details6. Each statement refers to a single barrier; partici-
pants made 2 –34 barrier statements each (Average &
Median: 14) with an average of 69 barriers per case study
(OnlineResource6). The ﬁrst author assigned each barrier
statement ( N = 829) one type category and one of 15
iteratively coded subtypes (2 –3 per type) developed by the
ﬁrst author and reviewed by the second author. Two student
assistants coded selected statements to determine Intercoder
Reliability7.
This study adapts the categories of Biesbroek et al. ( 2013)
to code barrier types (Table 2). Four of the original ﬁve
categories were used: Cognitive, Informational, Institutional,
and Social. The ﬁfth original category ‘Financial’ was
renamed to ‘Resources’ to include organizational resources
such as staff capacity. A new s ixth category (Physical/
Environmental) adapts the fra mework to restoration. The
barrier statements were then codedfor the spatial/jurisdictional
and temporal origins of each barrier, using an adjusted version
of the Moser and Ekstrom ( 2010) framework (Table 3).
For where or with whom a barrier originates, we use
Moser and Ekstrom ( 2010)’s spatial/jurisdictional levels;
barriers can be internal or external to the project. ‘Prox-
imate’ barriers result from the project site or project part-
ners. ‘Remote’ barriers originate from higher scales:
regional actors, governance institutions, or wider ecological
context such as landscape and climatic changes.
For when a barrier originates, we adapt the temporal
origins of Moser and Ekstrom ( 2010). Barriers to wetland
Table 1 Overview of Interview
Participants Interview Participants ( N = 59)
Location 23 Delta, 36 Bay
Job Title Technical Staff (24), Project/Program Managers (22), Policy Actor (13)
Organization Type Federal Agency (5), NGO (8), Partnership or Regional Government (4), Private
(10), Local Government or Special District (10), State Agency (21), University (1)
Project Case Studies A (5), B (5), C (7), D (4), E (4), F (5), G (4), H (7), J (4), Regional (14)
Table 2 Barrier Types (adapted from Biesbroek et al. 2013)
Barrier Type (from
Biesbroek et al. 2013
unless speci ﬁed)
Description Subtypes
Cognitive Personal perceptions of risk of or need for
wetland restoration that limit action among
project partners or external actors (e.g.,
permitters, public)
- Lack of Motivation (lack of leadership/commitment to fund,
maintain, support restoration)
- Translation of Policy to Implementation
- Lack of Urgency (too slow)
Informational Lack of knowledge, scienti ﬁc uncertainty or
changing science, staff turnover
- Knowledge (lack of)
- Science (uncertainty, communication)
- Staff Transition/Turnover (knowledge transfer or loss among
project partners or regulatory agencies)
Institutional Challenges with policy, legal, or institutional
structures (e.g., regulation or permit design) in
project partner organizations or regulations
- Organization Structure (e.g., internal siloes, org protocols,
guidance)
- Regulatory (e.g., permits, legal, jurisdictional authority)
Physical/ Ecological
(added by authors)
Barriers from physical or environmental
conditions or site constraints
- Built Environment (e.g., development pressure, utilities)
- Ecological (e.g., species, invasive weeds)
- Physical Environment (e.g., climate change, weather, soil
conditions, erosion)
Resources (renamed from
Financial in Biesbroek et
al. 2013)
Financial issues around funding and lack of staff
resources (capacity or staff time of project
partners or regulatory agencies)
- Staff (e.g., capacity, time)
- Funding (e.g., timing, combining sources, insuf ﬁcient for long
term maintenance or planning)
Social Barriers from internal collaborative dynamics
among partners or externally with stakeholders
(conﬂicting goals, lack of trust/understanding)
- Stakeholders (external actors including community, adjacent
landowners)
- Collaboration (internal partner dynamics)
6 Regional participants like policymakers or funders not tied to a
speciﬁc case study had ‘regional’ as the project and a location of Bay
or Delta based on their wetland work ’s geographic focus.
7 Both assistants coded a training set of 114 barriers from the ﬁrst 7
interviews then discussed with the ﬁrst author to reach full agreement.
They then coded a test set of 69 barriers from 7 randomly selected
interviews, resulting in agreement of 80% for barrier types, 75% for
subtypes, 75% for spatial/jurisdictional barrier origins, and 70% for
temporal barrier origins.
308 Page 6 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
restoration may result from factors before, during, or after
the project process 8. Barriers may be ‘Legacy’ (from past
decisions or context), ‘Contemporary’ (during the project
process) or ‘Future’. We add the ‘Future’ category to the
original framework for barriers from anticipated future
scenarios (e.g., changing funding priorities, climate change
impacts) affecting restoration already underway. These
temporal and spatial origins can identify the relevant scales
at which to intervene.
Our methods include descriptive statistics of reported
barriers and non-parametric tests of association to test for
statistically signi ﬁcant differences in barrier types and ori-
gins by project and participant characteristics (Bay or Delta,
Participant Role, Project). We use Chi-Square tests, except
when small sample sizes require Fisher ’s Exact Tests (if
expected frequency in at least once cell is less than ﬁve). All
statistical analysis was conducted in R.
Results: Reported Barrier Frequencies and
Comparisons
Frequency of Barrier Types with Examples
The most common barrier type is Physical/Environmental
(219 statements, 26%), re ﬂecting the importance of site-
level physical and ecological factors in wetland restoration
(Fig. 4). Physical barriers like site elevation, water salinity,
or precipitation variability are most common (92, 11%),
followed by ecological barriers (70, 8%) such as invasive
weeds. But barriers also result from the built environment
(57, 7%) given existing infrastructure crosses many land
parcels for restoration. Thus, potential con ﬂicts exist
between wetland restoration and the management of climate
impacts to critical infrastructure.
Built environment barriers are common in developed
estuaries like the Bay-Delta, where existing land use con-
strains potential restoration options. Project implementation
to restore habitats depends on site conditions. Participants
repeatedly mention infrastructure (e.g., pipelines, railroads)
cuts through available land and constrains potential design,
Table 3 Barrier Origins (adapted from Moser and Ekstrom 2010)
Origin Scales (from Moser and Ekstrom
2010)
Description/Deﬁnitions of Barrier Origin Types
Spatial/Jurisdictional Proximate- barrier from project site conditions, project partners, or adjacent/affected community (e.g.,
landowners, utilities, public)
Remote- barrier from higher-scale actors external to the project (e.g., regional or state regulators,
politicians, or funders) or regional conditions (e.g., landscape-scale climate impacts)
Temporal Legacy- barrier from pre-existing or prior choices, decisions, or actions (e.g., organization protocols,
regulatory policies, prior development or infrastructure placement)
Contemporary-barrier arises during the project process (e.g., negotiation with regulatory agencies,
outreach, construction)
Future- barrier from anticipated actions on the site (e.g., long term maintenance) or future conditions
that affect the project or site (e.g., climate change). Added by the authors .
Fig. 4 Reported Barriers to
Wetland Restoration by Subtype
(N = 829)
8 The project process refers to tasks after initial project siting/con-
ception, including project design, regulatory and legal approvals,
community engagement, funding management, and physical con-
struction such as levee breaches and planting.
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 7 of 17 308
while creating regulatory and social barriers from required
easements and collaboration with utilities:
“Utilities come up really often in wetland projects.
Gas lines, [ …] high voltage power lines [ …] waste-
water pipelines, water pipelines. So often there ’s these
large utilities that just go right through areas of
historic tidal marshes that we want to restore [ …] new
projects tend to have more challenging constraints to
work around ” -- R1
“railroad tracks encircle the bay, [ …] and they ’re right
in former tidal wetlands. So they ’re preventing not
only restoration of wetlands, but they ’re preventing
wetland migration. ” -- R6
“from a construction standpoint for implementing new
projects [ …] existing infrastructure is a gigantic hold
up [ …] either you build around them if you can, or
[…] you can ’t build anything here. ” -- R26
Participants note that extensive development in the Bay-
Delta limits land for restoration. ‘Pristine’ sites without
physical constraints from infrastructure or development
rarely exist, and not in suf ﬁcient quantity to meet restoration
goals. This mirrors barriers to other environmental infra-
structure; Borgström et al. ( 2006) argue that challenges to
green space implementation are more common in urban
landscapes partly due to ‘locked-in’ intensive land uses.
Some participants note the literal acreage available to pro-
ject developers does not match the ‘paper’ acreage called
for in regional targets or plans:
“how to actually really achieve acquiring that amount
of restoration property when it ’s not physically
available. It ’s a great grand scheme when you put it
in writing. But then, as you ’re implementing it over
the long term, that land availability is not there. ” --
R29
“How many years have we been doing restoration,
and all the good, easy locations have been taken [ …]
you’re looking at what ’s left. ” -- R40
But governance challenges matter too; Institutional
(20%, 163) and Resources (16%, 136) barriers are second
and third most common. Institutional barriers are over-
whelmingly from the regulatory subtype (143 of 163, the
most common subtype for all barriers). These barriers are
from state and federal permits, other legal requirements,
local easements, and jurisdictional con ﬂicts over regulatory
authority. As one participant noted:
“a lot of the local approvals like getting easements
from cities, from ﬂood control districts, having so
many different people have to review every single
design feature, and then have differences of opinions
of what needs to be done. [ …] It can almost feel like
you get frozen in what you can do. ” -- R30
Participants often experienced con ﬂicting requirements
for different approvals. Some permit requirements for spe-
cies habitat con ﬂict with public access requirements
(CDFW n.d.; BCDC 2005), because sensitive species and
human activity are not always compatible (Zedler & Leach
1998; Zingraff-Hamed et al. 2018). Con ﬂicts may occur
from distinct habitat preferences of different legally-
protected species. Some projects must balance restoring
tidal wetlands, which are habitat for endangered species like
the Salt Marsh Harvest Mouse and Ridgeway ’s Rail, with
enhancing managed ponds that provide habitat for protected
birds such as Snowy Plover (Palinkas et al. 2022). State
regulations require mitigation for habitat impacts if con-
version of existing habitats occurs; restoration of wetlands
on former agricultural land can require mitigation for the
loss of foraging habitat that agricultural ﬁelds provide to
some species (DWR 2020; Hull et al. 2020). Participants
mentioned con ﬂicting species requirements drive up
restoration costs and require additional land that may not be
available:
“There’s also the permitting aspect, which really can
be challenging, to have to do mitigation for a
restoration project. You ’re trying to build a habitat,
and you still have to mitigate for something ” -- R31
“So even though you ’re providing an ecological
uplift, you ’re having a negative impact to a listed
species. [ …] having to mitigate for an enhancement
project is expensive [ …] when you ’re already trying
to do restoration for the good of restoration [ …]
requiring this mitigation, which drives up the costs,
and in some cases makes it infeasible to move forward
with these projects. ” -- R40
Higher restoration costs, including from regulation, cre-
ates funding barriers. Resource barriers are largely ﬁnancial
(99 of 136) rather than from staff capacity (37). Funding
encompasses varied issues with timing, consistency, ﬂex-
ibility, and requirements. Most common is lack of long-term
monitoring or maintenance funding, timing issues in dis-
bursement, expiration/deadlines, and overall insuf ﬁciency
308 Page 8 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
of funding. Participants repeatedly cited a lack of long-term
maintenance funding:
“people’s goals are minimize costs because we can ’t
afford this. [ …] you ’ve got to manage these areas.
You cannot literally just sit and go, Okay, we ’re
gonna breach it to the tides and we ’re done with it.
[…] you can ’t do that. ” -- R22
“There is a huge disconnect [ …]i fw e ’re going to do
tidal restoration, there needs to be a commitment of
resources for interim management of the site, as well
as post restoration, a commitment to manage the
site.” -- R23
“most of the funding that ’s available is for capital
projects; there ’s very little funding available for
collaborative capacity. [ …] you have [to have] the
partnerships in place ﬁrst [ …] that comes out of deep
listening, and that is constrained by funding to have
relationships.” - R19
Participants mentioned funders may desire ‘no-cost’
restoration or want to ‘walk away ’ and ‘let nature take its
course’, but restoration entails landscape modi ﬁcations in
an already altered environment and needs stewardship to
maintain quality habitat (Moore & Rutherfurd 2017; Gala-
towitsch & Bohnen 2021; Palinkas et al. 2022). Participants
need more long-term funding to manage invasive weeds,
adjust water levels, or shift plant compositions over time for
future climate and salinity changes.
Other barriers types are less commonly reported. The
Informational category (13%, 104) has barriers in knowledge
(44), staff transitions (32), and available science (28). Parti-
cipants noted decades of wetlands science, pilot projects, and
regional policy generated practical and scienti ﬁck n o w l e d g e ;
site-speciﬁc, project process barriers were reported more.
Social barriers (16%) were more often reported from external
stakeholders (e.g., community, regulators, adjacent land-
owners) (95) than internal project partners (34). Participants
discussed dif ﬁculties in getting external actors like utilities
and regulators to adjust to site-speci ﬁc realities:
“The [Utility] has been super challenging to work
with [ …] they are not necessarily an active partner
who is willing to make compromises and talk about
what is needed ” -- R30
“working with landowners, working with funders,
working with project partners, we ’ve all been able to
work out those differences and really lead multi-
beneﬁt projects. Where it gets a little trickier is with
regulatory agencies who have particular mandates and
have particular laws that they ’re required to have
inform all of their work. ” -- R30
Different actors in the Bay and Delta make it dif ﬁcult to
create estuary-wide strategies and share lessons learned.
Prior studies ﬁnd Bay and Delta separation creates chal-
lenges for water and estuary management (Hanemann &
Dyckman 2009; Keeley et al. 2022; Layzer 2013). Partici-
pants recognized this disconnect between Bay and Delta
restoration communities as a barrier to coordinated, regional
restoration strategies:
“There’s very limited interaction between people in
the Delta, and people in the Bay. [ …]i t ’s also hard
because we don ’t do it together, an estuary-wide
scope.” -- R22
“the separation between the Bay and the Delta is
really frustrating for a lot of people [ …]w e ’re so
separated. It ’s like two different worlds. ” -- R12
Cognitive barriers are least commonly reported (9%, 78)
but often result from a lack of motivation from actors
responsible for funding, maintenance, or political decision-
making that supports wetland restoration projects. One
participant described dif ﬁculties getting funders and policy
actors to understand the necessity of ongoing land
stewardship:
“looking into the future, [ …] how are we going to
maintain it? And how are we going to pay for that?
[…] So getting people to understand that and commit
to this long term management and maintenance of
these sites [ …] that ’s certainly the biggest chal-
lenge” -- R21
Barrier Origins
Realities of implementation create proximate (site-level)
and contemporary (during the project process) barriers.
Slightly more reported barriers are proximate (53%, 439
barriers) than remote (47%, 390 barriers). Site-speci ﬁc
barriers highlight that local project context strongly affects
wetland restoration. Resources and Institutional are the most
common remote barriers, suggesting current policy, gov-
ernance, and funding strategies do not adequately meet
project-level needs. In timing, the majority of barriers are
contemporary to the project process (70%, 581 barriers).
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 9 of 17 308
Only 16% (133) of reported barriers are legacy, originating
from prior conditions or decisions, and 14% (115) from
future conditions. This underscores the importance of an
implementation focus; project developers experience bar-
riers in the project process not suf ﬁciently considered in
regional policy-making or funding. The spatial and tem-
poral origins of reported barriers can help identify where
restoration challenges arise and where to intervene. Similar
proportions of barriers tend to originate at both proximate
and remote scales across time periods (Table 4); in general,
most barriers are contemporary during the project process.
However, spatial origins do differ by barrier type. The left
hand side of Fig. 5 shows that Physical/Environmental bar-
riers are overwhelmingly proximate (at the project site) while
Institutional barriers result more from remote actors and
conditions (at the regional or landscape scale). Addressing
barriers in these categories may require policy interventions
at different governance scales with different system actors.
But the right hand side of Fig. 5 shows that most barriers,
regardless of spatial scale, are contemporary (arising during
the project process). This underscores the importance of
considering the project process and site when diagnosing
barriers to wetland restoration. But barriers do originate at all
scales; accelerating wetland restoration requires multiple
interventions with different actors and timing.
Barrier Comparisons by Location, Project, and
Participant Roles
Overall frequencies of barriers may obscure differences in
projects within the Bay-Delta. We use non-parametric tests
of association (Chi-Square, Fisher ’s Exact, see Methods) to
test for statistically signi ﬁcant differences in the proportion
of barrier types and origins by location, project, or partici-
pant type (OnlineResource4).
Despite the ecologically-interconnected estuary, the Bay
and Delta differ in regulatory requirements, physical con-
ditions, and landowners. Designs also differ across projects,
with goals based on habitat type, stakeholders, and site
conditions. Thus, we might expect the most common bar-
riers to differ by project and location. However, differences
in barrier type frequencies between Bay and Delta are not
statistically signi ﬁcant ( X2 = 9.964, p-value = 0.076; Onli-
neResource5). Participants experience common barriers
across the estuary. Bay and Delta barriers are also not sig-
niﬁcantly different for Spatial/Jurisdictional ( X2 = 0.878, p-
value = 0.349) or Temporal ( X2 = 4.957, p-value = 0.084)
origins. Contemporary barriers during the project process
dominate across the estuary.
The diversity of reported barriers does re ﬂect unique site
conditions; differences in barrier types between the nine
projects are statistically signi ﬁcant (Fisher ’s Exact Test
p-value = 0.001) (OnlineResource6). Partners of Project E
reported no Physical/ Environmental barriers, likely because
the project has yet to reach construction. Project J partners
reported fewer Resource barriers; they get dedicated state
agency funding as legally-mandated mitigation for envir-
onmental impacts of state operations. Differences in Spatial/
Jurisdictional barrier origins by project are signi ﬁcant with a
Chi-Square test ( X2 = 44.16, p-value = 1.319 × 10-6).
However, differences in temporal barrier origins by project
are not signi ﬁcant (Fischer ’s Exact Test p-value = 0.215).
All projects have more proximate than remote barriers,
except for Project F which is a large, long-running
Table 4 Barrier Frequencies for
Combinations of Barrier Origins Legacy Contemporary Future
Proximate 67 (8.1% of all barriers) 316 (38.1% of all barriers) 56 (6.8% of all barriers)
Remote 66 (8.0% of all barriers) 265 (32% of all barriers) 59 (7.1% of all barriers)
Fig. 5 Reported Barriers
(N = 829) by Type and Origin.
The width of ﬂows in the
Sankey diagram visually depict
the reported barriers by type
with different spatial origins
(left), and the reported barriers
by spatial origins with different
temporal origins (right)
308 Page 10 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
restoration program (OnlineResource7). Project F partners
may engage more remote stakeholders or experience more
regional policy and funding changes over time, which could
make remote barriers more salient or frequent. Our frame-
work’s ability to identify site-speci ﬁc barriers across mul-
tiple project contexts suggests its potential as a replicable
framework to diagnose wetland restoration barriers at
project-scales.
We also compare barrier types and origins across three
participant role types: project or program managers (25 par-
ticipants), technical staff (e.g., scientists, construction man-
agers, engineers) (24), and policy actors (e.g., funders,
executive directors, community outreach, politicians) (10).
While Institutional, Resources, and Physical/Environmental
are top 3 barrier types for all roles, barrier types are sig-
niﬁcantly different by participant role ( X2 = 27.081, p-
value = 0.003). ‘Policy Actor ’ participants reported more
Resource barriers and fewer Physical/Environmental barriers
than project-level participants (OnlineResource8). Project
managers and technical staff are the frontline for design,
engineering, and construction decisions and directly experi-
ence site conditions more than external policy actors. Spatial/
Jurisdictional origins are also signi ﬁcantly different by role
(X2 = 6.999, p-value = 0.030). ‘Policy Actors’ reported more
remote barriers while project managers and technical staff
reported more proximate barriers (OnlineResource9). Site-
level challenges are highly salient to project partners. How-
ever, differences in Temporal origins by role type are not
signiﬁcant (X2 = 4.812, p-value = 0.307). The implementation
phase was a key locus of barriers for all participants. Different
barrier experiences among different stakeholders suggests the
need for collaboration across the wetland restoration govern-
ance system, in order to integrate policy actors and project
managers with diverse knowledge and resources. We consider
changes in collaboration, alongside permitting and funding, to
accelerate Bay-Delta wetland restoration.
Discussion: Current Efforts and Potential
Solutions
For participants, barriers most often arise from con ﬂicts or
tensions between the project scale and the scale of regula-
tion and funding. We explore three of the most common
barriers around regulation, built environment, and funding
which re ﬂect these tensions and recommend strategies to
strengthen current efforts to address these barriers in the
Bay-Delta.
Addressing State and Federal Regulatory Barriers
Participants most commonly report barriers in the reg-
ulatory subtype, justifying California ’s increased focus on
streamlining regulatory processes for restoration. Current
state efforts include the “Cutting Green Tape Initiative ”
(CGT) by the California Natural Resources Agency and
simpliﬁed state and federal permits for restoration (TNC
2024). As part of CGT, the California Department of Fish
and Wildlife (CDFW) consolidated authorization into fewer
permits, the State Water Resource Control Board developed
a statewide order for water quality certi ﬁcation, and CDFW
now exempts restoration projects of certain sizes and types
from California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review
(CNRA 2022). U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS)
has a statewide biological opinion for restoration, meaning
California restoration projects need not undergo individual
review for threatened or endangered species impacts
(USFWS 2022).
However, some participants cannot utilize these options:
“there are all these initiatives to help streamline this
restoration work but the current laws are geared for
straight restoration. And most projects nowadays, it ’s
[…] multi bene ﬁts. You ’re not just doing restoration
for restoration. ” -- R40
Some state-level streamlining does not apply to all pro-
jects, particularly large multi-bene ﬁt projects with non-
restoration components. Increasingly, wetland restoration is
completed alongside ﬂood protection engineering such as
new levees, or construction of transportation or recreation
infrastructure (Camhi 2024; SLT n.d.). These may not ﬁt
habitat-only requirements of available streamlining. The
conception of restoration projects by policymakers and
regulators (as solely habitat projects) does not match that of
project developers (as multi-sector, multi-bene ﬁt projects).
As the nature of restoration shifts over time, policy must
adjust. Regulators and policymakers should reevaluate
current streamlining policies to identify if adjustments are
needed, particularly an expansion of the types of projects or
actions covered under streamlining policy language.
Participants also experienced con ﬂicting permit require-
ments as a regulatory barrier. When multiple agencies with
different missions grant approvals, accommodating all
requirements within a single project design may not be
feasible. Participants want more ﬂexibility to manage con-
ﬂicting regulatory requirements; as one said:
“it would be really helpful to give the agencies some
more room to make some tradeoffs in time, some
tradeoffs between species. Sometimes there are winners
and losers. But when something is overall gonna have a
really fantastic, overall positive effect ” -- R11
Some efforts aim to increase coordination among reg-
ulatory agencies for restoration approvals. The Bay
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 11 of 17 308
Restoration Regulatory Integration Team (BRRIT) con-
venes staff from six regulatory agencies to conduct a single,
coordinated pre-application process for restoration projects
in the Bay (BRRIT 2023). Further, individual projects have
negotiated with regulators for in-lieu provision of certain
requirements off-site when project designs or site conditions
cannot accommodate all objectives. One participant
described developing off-site recreation to avoid on-site
safety concerns:
“bordered another [ …] property that is operated as a
duck club. So the people eventually agreed that that
would be too intrusive to have the public trail in an
area where there was private management and hunting
going on. ”
Such efforts still involve lengthy, costly negotiations on
a project-by-project basis. Desired wetland restoration out-
comes in regional policy and regulation often con ﬂict on-
site, necessitating negotiated compromises between bene ﬁts
in implementation (Gmoser-Daskalakis 2025). Shifting to a
regional regulatory vision for wetland restoration outcomes
at the landscape scale could enable more ﬂexibility within
individual projects without compromising overall social and
environmental outcomes. Not every potential restoration
outcome can be optimized, and some outcomes are reduced
when adding other components (Tan et al. 2022). Rather
than each project meeting multiple permit conditions, such
as sensitive habitat and recreation, requirements could be
evaluated and met across the full portfolio of projects in the
region. One site may accommodate more public access and
another more sensitive habitat. Rather than achieving this
via multiple individual permits for each project, landscape-
scale assessment of bene ﬁt provision across projects could
achieve regional goals while reducing project-level
negotiations.
Such a solution may generate con ﬂicts. Regulators or
stakeholders may be concerned about further streamlining
or ﬂexibility compromising goals of speci ﬁc regulations,
such as the Endangered Species Act. Further, each project
site involves stakeholder goals from project partners, land-
owners, funders, and the public that may be dif ﬁcult to
reconcile or narrow down (Gmoser-Daskalakis 2025). But
the idea of integrated permitting to create ﬂexibility across
multiple permits without compromising environmental
outcomes has long existed in the literature (Rabe 1995).
NbS literature also recommends regional planning with
more focus on landscape conditions and interdependencies
to address bene ﬁt synergies and trade-offs (Albert et al.
2019; van Rees et al. 2024). Creating a satisfactory regional
regulatory vision for wetland outcomes requires extensive
collaboration and alignment between regulatory actors, and
scientists must understand how projects interact to produce
landscape-level outcomes. Existing regional partnerships
and scienti ﬁc research institutes could expand their efforts
to connect Bay and Delta practitioners, scientists, and reg-
ulators (SFEP, n.d.; SFEI, n.d.; DSC 2024). More colla-
boration must also address related regulatory barriers,
particularly with municipal actors and utilities.
Building Collaboration with Local Actors
Despite efforts to consolidate state or federal permits, pro-
jects still need easements from local governments, special
districts, or even utilities and adjacent landowners, which
increases costs and delays. Restoration in highly-developed
estuaries like the Bay-Delta requires more local approvals,
as available parcels are often located by or within multiple
land uses and authorities, including utility infrastructure.
Requirements for these approvals sometimes con ﬂict with
other regulatory requirements. Easements are context-
speciﬁc to each project site and in ﬂuenced by the goals of
local actors. Participants report local-level approvals often
require relationships built on a project-by-project basis,
which can be costly or create delays:
“working on land with a ton of landowners, a ton of
infrastructure and different easements that are needed
[…] We made great progress on [a prior] project [ …]
We haven ’t gotten there with [this] project with them
[Utility], and that has been a challenge. [ …]I tw i l l
happen eventually, but it might take a long time, and
it’s already taken a long time. ” -- R30
Further, participants ﬁnd approvals often come from city
attorneys or legal teams that lack understanding of
restoration or do not regularly collaborate with project
partners:
“You’re overlooking [ …] essentially veto power in
the hands of some city or county administrator [ …]
they can just grind everything to halt. [ …] And there ’s
almost no effort put towards greasing those wheels a
little bit ” -- R7
“Often in counties or municipalities, these decisions
about permitting are really made largely through their
counsel, their attorneys, not through people who do
natural resource management, and in their planning
departments. The planners are largely around the
human, built, gray infrastructure [ …] habitat restora-
tion is largely unknown. ” -- R19
Broader, systematic efforts at collaboration, information
sharing, and training with local governments, urban
308 Page 12 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
planners, utilities, and infrastructure operators could ensure
these actors better understand restoration needs and prevent
the need to restart negotiations with every project. Social-
ecological systems literature recommends trusted organi-
zations connect interdependent but otherwise disconnected
actors to increase collaboration (Sayles and Baggio 2017;
Vantaggiato et al. 2023; Wiegant et al. 2022; Tait and
Brunson 2022; Rozance et al. 2020; Adams et al. 2021).
Multiple participants recommended Resource Conservation
Districts (non-regulatory special districts who work with
landowners and local governments on environmental man-
agement) and Joint Ventures (voluntary regional partner-
ships for migratory bird protection) to reach local actors for
education and relationship-building.
Dedicated Project Stewardship Funding
Funding was the second most reported barrier subtype;
participants said funding often comes with expiration dates,
restrictions, or ﬂuctuations subject to political will or state
revenues. Participants speci ﬁcally lacked funding for certain
project phases. At present, growing state revenues, state
bonds, and federal funding bills have increased public funds
for wetland restoration (SFBRA 2025; NOAA 2025; Petek
2026). However, some funds, particularly state bonds, must
be spent on ‘shovel-ready’ capital projects or construction
phases, with less funding available for planning, design,
pre-construction site management, and long-term, post-
construction monitoring and maintenance. Participants
struggled with obtaining suf ﬁcient funds for site steward-
ship and long-term maintenance from funders:
“it’s not easy, but it ’s possible to ﬁnd money to
actually do the restoration. But it ’s really hard to ﬁnd
the money to continue to do maintenance [ …] that ’s
not a priority out there. ” -- R2
“It’s very dif ﬁcult to get funding for any long term
operations.[…]i t’s still underfunded and just anything
that needs to be operated like water control structures,
or […] weeding […] patrolling a site that ’s open to the
public or not [ …] that has been very hard to come
by.” -- R11
Literature already recommends expanding the timing of
funding for estuary management (Sayles and Baggio 2017),
blue-green infrastructure (Deely et al. 2020), and restoration
(Sapkota et al. 2018). Private funders are suited to target the
full project cycle, given legal limitations that prevent some
public funds like bonds for non-capital investments (CA
Govt Code § 16727 2025). Ecosystem restoration literature
calls for more private funding, including in long-term
monitoring (Lofqvist & Ghazoul 2019; Ermgassen &
Lofqvist 2024; Biasin et al. 2024). Foundations and non-
proﬁts may have more ﬂexibility to alter their funding
requirements and allocations. Several participants used
private grants to ﬁll project funding gaps for planning,
design, site preparation, monitoring and maintenance. One
private funder already recognizes their role as ‘gap ﬁller’,
speciﬁcally for pre-construction phases:
“I look at our role as not funding the actual
restoration, say, or the construction, the earth moving,
but enabling restoration. So that means funding early
stage, getting these projects to the point where they
can get permitted [ …] where they can put [in] an
application for signi ﬁcant public funds. ” -- R35
Adjusting funding guidelines or creating new funding
sources to target site maintenance can address this barrier,
but may require cognitive shifts in how funders think about
project timescales and their role in restoration, expanding
beyond construction and ‘ribbon cutting ’. One participant
found the motivation of funders overemphasized construc-
tion compared to maintenance:
“a lot of funders don ’t want to fund anything but the
construction cause that ’s the dramatic piece, right?
They want to fund something that you change and
then walk away from, which can ’t be the case. ” -- R32
Similarly, NbS studies of green stormwater infrastructure
and urban parks recognize insuf ﬁcient funder and policy-
maker prioritization of long-term maintenance (Dempsey &
Burton 2012; Mell 2021; Knapick et al. 2025; WWF 2025).
Studies recommend private actor funding, including
through Corporate Social Responsibility, for green infra-
structure maintenance (Mell 2021) and coastal restoration
(Sanchez-Arcilla et al. 2022). Wetland restoration also
needs more awareness among funders around the value of
long-term maintenance and adjusted incentive structures to
motivate funding these activities.
Study Limitations and Future Applications
As climate adaptation increasingly incorporates on-the-
ground actions like wetland restoration, scholars must
consider how current perspectives of climate adaptation
must shift. This study demonstrates climate adaptation
barrier frameworks apply to wetland restoration imple-
mentation, but require adjustment to re ﬂect physical con-
ditions and timing of project processes. Consideration of
spatial and temporal scales can diagnose barriers and
identify solutions to accelerate wetland restoration. Our
adjusted framework may apply to other adaptation
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 13 of 17 308
interventions such as NbS for ﬂooding and extreme heat
(e.g., green stormwater infrastructure, urban forestry). It
works well for regions or systems with signi ﬁcant urban
development and complex socio-political institutions, as it
includes social-ecological conditions and interactions
between spatial and temporal scales.
However, our study has limitations for broader applica-
tion. Notably, reported barriers were not hard limits or
obstacles to project completion. We have no counterfactuals
of projects that failed or never began. Identifying this uni-
verse of ‘failed’ projects may prove dif ﬁcult but could
illuminate limits to implementation. Recall bias is an
additional concern inherent in interviews about past pro-
jects. Future research applying this framework to other
restoration projects or NbS can determine the applicability
of our ﬁndings beyond our cases.
Conclusion
Our study shows wetland restoration implementation
involves a complex array of physical and governance fac-
tors from project developers, regulatory structures, and land
parcels. Increasing restoration to meet targets requires
diagnosing barriers in the implementation process; current
literature either lacks a generalizable framework or does not
adequately incorporate site-level considerations. We pro-
pose a barriers framework that better incorporates project-
scale realities of wetland restoration.
Applying our framework to the California Bay-Delta
reveals project partners experience barriers from the built
and natural environment, permitting, and funding. Efforts to
reduce regulatory barriers must facilitate collaboration
between restoration practitioners, policymakers, local gov-
ernments, and utilities to better accommodate site-speci ﬁc
conditions in regulation. There may be a role for regional
partnerships and non-regulatory organizations to play by
connecting actors operating at different scales. Funders,
particularly private funders, can target the full project cycle,
especially for long-term maintenance.
Future research could apply this framework elsewhere;
similar barriers may signal our recommendations are
relevant to other developed, c oastal estuaries promoting
wetland restoration for climat e adaptation. This research
is a ﬁrst step to more explicit examination of the social-
ecological process of wetland restoration. We demon-
strate wetland restoration implementation faces unique
challenges, particularly in tran slating regional policies to
proximate project realities. Ap proaches rooted in social-
ecological systems can navigate the dual social-
ecological nature of wetland restoration to facilitate the
expansion of this climate adaptation strategy in California
and globally.
Data Availability
Anonymized data and code to reproduce the analysis pre-
sented in this paper are available at https://github.com/ucd-
cepb/Bay-Delta-Wetlands-Barriers.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-026-02618-7.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank undergraduate
research interns Grace Olson and Jack Walker for performing barriers
coding for interrater reliability, and staff at the San Francisco Estuary
Institute and San Francisco Bay Joint Venture for assistance with the
EcoAtlas database. Additionally, thank you to the wetland restoration
practitioners who generously shared their time and experiences in
interviews.
Author Contributions K.G.D. contributed Conceptualization, Data
Curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project
Administration, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing —original
draft, and Writing —review & editing. M.L. contributed Con-
ceptualization, Funding Acquisition, Methodology, Project Adminis-
tration, Supervision, Writing- original draft, and Writing —review &
editing. G.A. contributed Conceptualization, Funding Acquisition,
Supervision, and Writing —review & editing.
Funding This study was supported by a University of California
Multicampus- National Lab Collaborative Research and Training
Award (Grant #L22CR4529).
Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Adams C, Hovick S, Anderson N & Kettenring K (2021) We can
better manage ecosystems by connecting solutions to constraints:
learning from wetland plant invasions. Front. Environ. Sci. 9.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2021.715350.
Albert C, Schroter B, Haase D, Brillinger M, Henze J, & Matzdorf B
(2019) Addressing societal challenges through nature-based
solutions: How can landscape planning and governance
research contribute? Landsc Urban Plan 182:12 –21. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.10.003.
Austin C (2023) Ecosystem Restoration Progress Review for the Delta
and Suisun Marsh. Maven's Notebook. https://mavensnotebook.
308 Page 14 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
com/2023/05/10/feature-ecosystem-restoration-progress-review-
for-the-delta-and-suisun-marsh/.
Bataille CY, Malinen SK, Lyver P (2023) Shouldering the burden:
social-ecological scale mismatches in wetland ecosystem man-
agement in Aotearoa New Zealand. Ecosyst People
19(1):2279589. https://doi.org/10.1080/26395916.2023.2279589.
Bay Adapt (2021) Joint Platform. https://www.bayadapt.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022/01/BayAdapt_JointPlaform_Final_
Oct2021.pdf.
Bay Restoration Regulatory Integration Team (BRRIT) (2023) “2023
Annual Report ”. https://www.sfbayrestore.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
2023-10/2023%20BRRIT%20Annual%20Report_FINAL_
101223.pdf.
Bell-James J, Fitzsimons JA, Lovelock CE (2023) Land tenure, own-
ership and use as barriers to coastal wetland restoration projects in
Australia: recommendations and solutions. Environ Manag
72:179–189. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-023-01817-w.
Bell-James J (2022) Overcoming legal barriers to coastal wetland
restoration: lessons from Australia ’s Blue Carbon methodology.
Restor Ecol 31(7):e13780. https://doi.org/10.1111/rec.13780.
Biasin A, Toxopeus H, Pettenella D, Polzin F, Masiero M (2024)
Financing urban Nature-based Solutions (NBS): a literature
review from the perspective of funders. Nat -Based Solut 6:
100195. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbsj.2024.100195.
Biesbroek GR, Klostermann JEM, Termeer CJAM et al. (2013) On the
nature of barriers to climate change adaptation. Reg Environ
Change 13:1119 –1129. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-013-
0421-y.
Borgström S, Elmqvist T, Angelstam P, Alfsen-Norodom C (2006)
Scale mismatches in management of urban landscapes. Ecol Soc
11(2). https://www.jstor.org/stable/26266007.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) (n.d.) “Envir-
onmental Review and Permitting ”. Accessed 29 May 2026.
https://wildlife.ca.gov/Conservation/Environmental-Review.
California Department of Technology (2024) “California County
Boundaries and Identi ﬁers” (Dataset). Data.gov. Accessed 3
August 2026. https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/california-county-
boundaries-and-identiﬁers?from_hint=eyJxIjoiY2Fsa
WZvcm5pYSBjb3VudHkgYm91bmRhcmllcyIsInNvcnQiOiJyZ
WxldmFuY2UifQ%3D%3D.
California Department of Water Resources (DWR) (2020) “Exhibit C:
Lookout Slough Tidal Habitat Restoration and Flood Improve-
ment Project, as analyzed in the 2020 FEIR ”. State Clearinghouse
#2019039136. https://water.ca.gov/-/media/DWR-Website/Web-
Pages/Programs/Environmental-Services/Restoration-Mitigation-
Compliance/Files/Lookout-Slough-FEIR_DES_v1_11032020_a
y11.pdf.
California Energy Commission (CEC) (2024) “Wetlands” (Dataset).
California State Geoportal. Accessed 19 February 2026. https://
gis.data.ca.gov/datasets/b976470bf64d45069f1346b24faf5ef7/a
bout.
California Government Code §16727 (2025)
California Natural Resources Agency (CNRA) (2022) Transforming
Environmental Restoration: Progress on the Cutting Green Tape
Initiative. Report. https://resources.ca.gov/-/media/CNRA-
Website/Files/Initiatives/Green-Tape/update-20220317/CNRA-
Report--Transforming-Environmental-Restoration--Progress-on-
the-Cutting-Green-Tape-Initiative.pdf.
California Wetland Monitoring Working Group (CWMW). (2024).
EcoAtlas. Accessed June 4, 2024. https://www.ecoatlas.org.
Callaway J, Parker VT, Vasey M, Schile L, Herbert E (2011) Tidal
Wetland Restoration in San Francisco Bay: History and Current
Issues. San Francisco Estuary & Watershed Science, 9(3). https://
doi.org/10.15447/sfews.2011v9iss3art2.
Camhi T (2024) “The Bay Area ’s Sinking Neighborhood Gets a
Boost”. KQED. Accessed 28 May 2026 from https://www.kqed.
org/news/11678417/the-bay-areas-sinking-neighborhood-gets-a-
boost.
Chausson A, Turner B, Seddon D, Chabaneix N, Girardin CAJ,
Seddon N (2020) Mapping the effectiveness of nature-based
solutions for climate change adaptation. Glob Change Biol
26(11):6134–6155. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15310.
Clare S, Creed IF (2022) The Essential Role of wetland restoration
practitioners in the science-policy-practice process. Frontiers in
Ecology and Evolution, 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2022.
838502.
Cortina-Segarr et al. (2021) Barriers to ecological restoration in Eur-
ope: expert perspectives. Restor Ecol 29(4):e13346. https://doi.
org/10.1111/rec.13346.
Dawson L, Elbakidze M, Angelstam P, Gordon J (2017) Governance
and management dynamics of landscape restoration at multiple
scales: learning from successful environmental managers in
Sweden. J Environ Manag 197:24 –40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2017.03.019.
Deely J, Hynes S, Barquín J, Burgess D, Finney G, Ballé-Béganton J
(2020) Barrier Identi ﬁcation Framework for the Implementation
of Blue and Green Infrastructures. Land Use Policy 99:105108.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.105108.
de Groot D, Brander L, Finlayson CM (2018) Wetland Ecosystem
Services. In CM Finlayson, M Everard, K Irvine, RJ McInnes,
BA Middleton, AA van Dam, & NC Davidson (Eds.), The
Wetland Book: I: Structure and Function, Management, and
Methods (pp. 323 –333). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-90-481-9659-3_66.
Delta Stewardship Council (DSC) (2022) “Protect, Restore, and
Enhance the Delta Ecosystem ”. Amendment to Chapter 4 of the
Delta Plan. https://deltacouncil.ca.gov/pdf/delta-plan/2022-06-29-
chapter-4-protect-restore-and-enhance-the-delta-ecosystem.pdf.
Delta Stewardship Council (DSC) (2024) “About the Delta Science
Program”. Accessed March 21, 2024. https://deltacouncil.ca.gov/
delta-science-program/.
Dempsey N, Burton M (2012) De ﬁning place-keeping: the long-term
management of public spaces. Urban Forestry Urban Green
11(1):11–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2011.09.005.
Ermgassen S, Lofqvist S (2024) Financing ecosystem restoration.
Primer 34(9):412 –417. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2024.02.
031.
Galatowitsch S, Bohnen J (2021) Long-term recovery of a restored
palustrine wetland: the role of monitoring and adaptive man-
agement. Wetl Restor 41:80. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13157-021-
01478-7.
Gittman R, Baillie C, Arkema K, Bennett R, Benoit J, Grabowski J
(2019) Voluntary Restoration: Mitigation ’s Silent Partner in the
Quest to Reverse Coastal Wetland Loss in the USA. Front Mar
Sci 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.00511.
Gmoser-Daskalakis K (2025) Multi-Bene ﬁt Wetland Restoration in the
California Bay-Delta: A Governance and Policy Process Per-
spective. UC Davis. https://www.proquest.com/LegacyDocView/
DISSNUM/32113034. Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/
uc/item/0gt3903v.
Goals Project (2015) The Baylands and Climate Change: What We
Can Do. Baylands Ecosystem Habitat Goals Science Update 2015
prepared by the San Francisco Bay Area Wetlands Ecosystem
Goals Project. California State Coastal Conservancy, Oakland,
CA. https://behgu.aviandesign.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/
Baylands_Complete_Report.pdf.
Gupta S, Kotyal K, Beleri PS, Langangmeilu G, Malathi G (2024)
Advancing nature-based solutions for climate adaptation and eco-
system restoration. Environ Rep.https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15310.
Hanemann M, Dyckman C (2009) The San Francisco Bay-Delta: A
failure of decision-making capacity. Environ Sci Policy
12(6):710–725. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2009.07.004.
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 15 of 17 308
Hettiarachchi M, Morrison TH, McAlpine C (2015) Forty-three years
of Ramsar and urban wetlands. Glob Environ Change 32:57 –66.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.02.009.
Hull R, Birkey S, Morrison C (2020) “California Environmental
Quality Act Considerations When Evaluating Impacts to Aquatic
and Other Biological Resources ”. Argent Commun Group.
https://argentco.com/post/california-environmental-quality-act-
considerations-when-evaluating-impacts-to-aquatic-and-other-
biological-resources/.
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) (2016)
‘Deﬁning Nature-based solutions. WCC-2016-Res-069-EN. World
Conservation Congress Resolution, Adopted September 2016
Keeley A, Fremier AK, Goertler PA, Huber PR, Sturrock AM, Stahl
AT (2022) Governing Ecological Connectivity in Cross-Scale
Dependent Systems. BioScience 72(4):372 –386. https://doi.org/
10.1093/biosci/biab140.
Knapik E, Brandimarte L, Usher M (2025) Maintenance in sustainable
stormwater management: issues, barriers and challenges. J
Environ Plan Manag 68(12):2769 –2795. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09640568.2024.2325041.
Layzer JA (2013) Using Science to Restore California ’s Bay-Delta.
San Francisco Estuary & Watershed Science 11(3). https://doi.
org/10.15447/sfews.2013v11iss3art3.
Lofqvist S, Ghazoul J (2019) Private funding is essential to leverage
forest and landscape restoration at global scales. Nat Ecol Evolut
3:1612–1615. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-019-1031-y.
Lubell M, Gerlak A, Heikkila T (2013) CalFed and collaborative
watershed management: success despite failure? In Making Space
for the River: Governance Experiences with Multifunctional
River Flood Management in the US and Europe (pp. 63 –78).
IWA Publishing, London, UK
Mell I (2021) But who ’s going to pay for it? ’ Contemporary approa-
ches to green infrastructure ﬁnancing, development and govern-
ance in London, UK. J Environ Policy Plan 23(5):628 –645.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1523908X.2021.1931064.
Moore HE, Rutherfurd ID (2017) Lack of maintenance is a major
challenge for stream restoration projects. River Res Appl
33(9):1387–1399. https://doi.org/10.1002/rra.3188.
Moser SC, Ekstrom JA (2010) A framework to diagnose barriers to
climate change adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
107(51):22026–22031. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1007887107.
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) (2025)
“Habitat Restoration Under the Infrastructure Investment and Job
Act”. Accessed 12 March 2025 from: https://www.ﬁsheries.noaa.
gov/national/habitat-conservation/habitat-restoration-under-infra
structure-investment-and-jobs-act.
Orr M (2018) “The 40-Year Evolution of Wetland Restoration Approa-
ches in San Francisco Bay ”. Environmental Science Associates
(ESA). https://esassoc.com/news-and-ideas/2018/02/the-40-year-
evolution-of-wetland-restoration-approaches-in-san-francisco-bay/.
Palinkas C, Orton P, Hummel M, Nardin W, Sutton-Grier A, Williams
T (2022) Innovations in Coastline Management with Natural and
Nature-Based Features (NNBF): Lessons Learned from Three
Case Studies. Front Built Environ 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbuil.
2022.814180.
Petek G (2026) The 2026-2027 Budget: Proposition 4 Spending Plan.
Legislative Analyst ’sO f ﬁce. https://lao.ca.gov/reports/2026/
5115/2026-2027-Prop-4-Spending-Plan-021026.pdf.
Rabe B (1995) Integrating environmental regulation: permitting
innovation at the state level. J Policy Anal Manag 14(3):467 –472.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3325036.
Raska P, Bezak N, Ferreira C, Kalantari Z, Banasik K, Hartmann T
(2022) Identifying barriers for nature-based solutions in ﬂood risk
management: an interdisciplinary overview using expert com-
munity approach. J Environ Manag 310:114725. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.114725.
Rozance M, Denham D, Kidd S (2020) Contesting neoliberal
knowledge politics in restoration governance: the restorationist ’s
dilemma. J Environ Policy Plan 22(3):413 –427. https://doi.org/
10.1080/1523908X.2020.1743651.
Saleh F, Weinstein M (2016) The role of nature-based infrastructure
(NBI) in coastal resiliency planning: a literature review. J Environ
Manag 183(3):1088 –1098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.
2016.09.077.
Sanchez-Arcilla A, Caceres I, Le Roux X, Hinkel J, Schuerch M,
Torresan S (2022) Barriers and enablers for upscaling coastal
restoration. Nat -Based Solut 2:100032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nbsj.2022.100032.
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission
(BCDC) (2005) Shoreline Spaces: Public Access Design Guide-
lines for the San Francisco Bay. https://www.bcdc.ca.gov/wp-
content/uploads/sites/354/2023/09/Public-Access-Design-
Guidelines-Shoreline-Spaces-PDF.pdf.
San Francisco Bay Restoration Authority (SFBRA). (2023). “MEA-
SURE AA 2023 REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS ”. Accessed
March 21, 2024. https://www.sfbayrestore.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
2023-08/Round%207%20RFP%202023_Oct%2010.pdf.
San Francisco Bay Restoration Authority (SFBRA) (2025) “Annual
Report Fiscal Year 2024-2025 ”. Accessed 29 May 2026.
https://www.sfbayrestore.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2025-12/SFBRA
%20Annual%20Report%2024-25%20.pdf?cb=cddbdfdd.
San Francisco Estuary Institute (SFEI) (n.d.) “About Us ”. Accessed
March 21, 2024. https://www.sfei.org/contact.
San Francisco Estuary Partnership (SFEP) (n.d.) “About Us ”. Acces-
sed March 21, 2024. https://www.sfestuary.org/.
Sapkota RP, Stahl PD, Rijal K (2018) Restoration governance: an
integrated approach towards sustainably restoring degraded eco-
systems. Environ Dev 27:83 –94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envdev.2018.07.001.
Sayles J (2018) Effects of social-ecological scale mismatches on
estuary restoration at the project and landscape level in Puget
Sound, USA. Ecol Restor 36:62 –75. https://doi.org/10.3368/er.
36.1.62c.
Sayles J, Baggio J (2017) Social –ecological network analysis of scale
mismatches in estuary watershed restoration. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 114(10):E1776 –E1785. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1604405114.
Schultz C, Timberlake T, Wurtzebach Z, McIntyre K, Moseley C,
Huber-Stearns H (2019) Policy Tools to Address Scale Mis-
matches: Insights from U.S. Forest Governance. Ecology and
Society 24(1). https://www.jstor.org/stable/26796926.
Sonoma Land Trust (SLT) (n.d.) “Highway 37 Redesign ”. Accessed
March 21, 2024. https://sonomalandtrust.org/current-initiatives/
highway-37-redesign/.
State Water Resources Control Board (State Water Board) (2018)
Water Quality Control Plan for the San Francisco Bay/Sacra-
mento-San Joaquin Delta Estuary. California State Water
Resources Control Board. https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/pla
ns_policies/docs/2018wqcp.pdf.
Stewart-Sinclair et al (2020) Blue Restoration- Building Con ﬁdence
and Overcoming Barriers. Front Marine Sci, 7. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fmars.2020.541700.
“Suisun Marsh Habitat Management, Preservation, and Restoration
Plan” (SMP). (2013). https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/wa
terrights/water_issues/programs/bay_delta/california_waterﬁx/
exhibits/docs/swrcb_94.pdf.
Tait M, Brunson M (2022) Barriers and opportunities for cooperative
wetland management: a case study in the Greater Rocky Moun-
tain National Park ecosystem. Wetl Ecol Manag 30(2):257 –272.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11273-021-09849-x.
Tan ZD, Carrasco LR, Taylor D (2022) Peatland restoration as an
affordable nature-based climate solution with ﬁre reduction and
308 Page 16 of 17 Environmental Management (2026) 76:308
conservation co-bene ﬁts in Indonesia. Environ Res Lett
17(6):064028. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac6f6e.
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) (2024) “Accelerated Permitting for
Restoration Projects ”. State of Salmon in California. Accessed
March 21, 2024. https://casalmon.org/streamlined-permitting/.
Tuihedur Rahman HM, Bowron T, Pett B, Sherren K, Wilson A, van
Proosdij D (2021) Navigating nature-based coastal adaptation
through barriers: a synthesis of practitioners ’ narrative from Nova
Scotia. Soc Nat Resour 34(9):1268 –1285. https://doi.org/10.
1080/08941920.2021.1940405.
U.S. President Joseph R. Biden Jr. Executive Order no. 14008,
“Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad. ” Federal
Register Vol 86, (February 2021): 7619-7633
U.S. EPA (2021) “San Francisco Bay Delta: About the Watershed ”.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.
epa.gov/sfbay-delta/about-watershed.
U.S. Fish Wildlife Service (USFWS). (2022) Programmatic Biological
and Conference Opinion California Statewide Programmatic
Restoration Effort. FWS Reference: 2022-0005149-S7. U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service Region 8, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration. https://www.
fws.gov/media/2022083120220005149-s7-statewide-restoration-
ﬁnal-pbo-appendices.
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) (2017)“Wetland Restoration in the San
Francisco Bay Delta and the Paci ﬁc Northwest”. Western Ecolo-
gical Research Center (WERC), United States Geological Survey.
https://www.usgs.gov/centers/werc/science/wetland-restoration-sa
n-francisco-bay-delta-and-paciﬁc-northwest.
van Rees C, Chambers M, Catalano A, Buhr D, Mansur AV, Nibbe-
link N (2024) An interdisciplinary overview of levee setback
beneﬁts: Supporting spatial planning and implementation of riv-
erine nature-based solutions. WIREs Water 11(6):e1750. https://
doi.org/10.1002/wat2.1750.
Vantaggiato F, Lubell M, Hummel M, Chow A, Tcheukam Siwe A
(2023) Creating adaptive social-ecological ﬁt: the role of regional
actors in the governance of sea-level rise adaptation in San
Francisco Bay. Glob Environ Change 80:102654. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2023.102654.
Vélez M, Manuel J, Barrasa García S, Espinoza Tenorio A (2018)
Policies in coastal wetlands: key challenges. Environ Sci Policy
88:72–82. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.06.016.
Wiegant D, van Oel P, Dewulf A (2022) Scale-sensitive governance in
forest and landscape restoration: a systematic review. Regional
Environ Change 22(1):25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-022-
01889-0.
WWF (2025) Balancing Bankability and Integrity: Fostering
Investment-Ready Nature-based Solutions. Chausson, A, Zu
Ermgassen, S, Bull, JW, Hafferty, C, Milner-Gulland, EJ, New-
ing, H, Swin ﬁeld, T, Thompson, B, & Carter, H WWF-UK,
Woking, United Kingdom
Zedler JB, Leach MK (1998) Managing urban wetlands for multiple
uses: research, restoration, and recreation. Urban Ecosystems
2:189–204. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009528505009.
Zingraff-Hamed A, Noack M, Greulich S, Schwarzwalder K, Wantzen
KM, Pauleit S (2018) Model-based evaluation of urban river
restoration: con ﬂicts between sensitive ﬁsh species and recrea-
tional users. Sustainability 10(6):1747. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su10061747.
Robinson A, Beers L, Walker D, Symonds J, Grosso C, Braud A,
Iknayan K (2025) Tracking Tidal Wetland Extent in San Fran-
cisco Bay: A 2020 Mapping Update. SFEI Contribution No.
1234. San Francisco Estuary Institute: Richmond, CA.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Environmental Management (2026) 76:308 Page 17 of 17 308