Micro, small and medium (MSM) food and drink producers form a growing sector of economic importance to North-East Scotland (NES). The context of North-East Scotland provides insight into the impact and inspiration of the distinctive geographic and cultural assets and facets of the region. Substantive research investigating food and drink products adopts a consumers' viewpoint, considering factors of locality, provenance, quality, organic, and food safety as attributes that could influence consumer behaviour and a decision-making practice. Food and drink industry research includes extant research from procurement and production, considering issues of traceability, quality assurance, changes in technology and supply chain management. Aligned to food and drink producers and products, food tourism and hospitality sectors can influence destination development enhancing potential benefits to the region. The economic and socio-cultural benefits of food and drink production have been acknowledged forming a foundation in the strategic planning for North-East Scotland. The support from industry, public and private bodies, has enabled established and start-up enterprises to develop. This research explored the phenomena related to MSM food and drink producers during development, production and distribution of their food or drink products in the geographical context of North-East Scotland. The experiences that influence the lived reality of these individuals within this geographical, social and cultural environment was investigated. A mixed qualitative methodology encompassing textual and visual approaches was designed to develop a semi-structured interview framework. This approach included a series of open-ended questions, a North-East Scotland PhotoTrail compiled by the researcher, and a Producer Personal Portrayal PhotoTrail based on images provided by the food and drink producer. The overall interview findings were analysed using thematic analysis to ascertain the main themes of the investigation. The overarching themes of the analysis were producer, place and product. The producer profile was found to be complex, defined by an overall desire to be authentic in their product development. Characteristics including confidence, creative, trusting, fun and spontaneous, underpinned their aim to be commercial while achieving a holistic lifestyle as a micro, small or medium food and drink producer in North-East Scotland. Strong findings within the context of North-East Scotland were motivation from place, provenance, a sense of achievement through product creation, moreover, realising a holistic lived experience. This research acknowledges the producers' appreciation for place and community, innovation, natural environment, regional assets, family and enterprise legacy. The conceptual 3P cyclical framework encapsulates these distinctive regional and personal attributes placing the authentic North-East Scotland food and drink producer at its centre. This research