nature biomedical engineering Volume 10 | September 2026 | 1786 | 1786
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-026-01808-2
Editorial
Source data under scrutiny
The source data underlying results 
and figures in our manuscripts 
can be critical for assessing the 
rigour of our studies and for 
reproducibility. Ensuring the quality 
and provenance of these data during 
manuscript preparation is essential 
bookkeeping.
N
ature Portfolio journals have 
been mandating or strongly 
recommending the sharing of 
the source data underlying the 
figures published in our papers 
for well over a decade. Much more than just 
underlying a pretty figure, these data rep -
resent the results of the study, can give real 
insight into statistical handling of data and 
data quality and, in rare cases, can highlight 
problematic irregularities in experimental 
procedures and evidence.
Historically, shared source data were often 
left in the dark: omnipresent, but only mean-
ingfully examined by the most interested of 
readers. However, the rise of machine learning 
models has made source data readily accessi-
ble and straightforward to mine for discrepan-
cies between the data and the figures.
A recent spate of high-profile corrections 
and retractions launched a wave of source 
data corrections even within our journal, 
in which authors have taken the initiative 
to flag and patch inconsistencies between 
figures and source data in their published 
papers. In the vast majority of cases, the 
issues identified arise from unintentional 
copy-and-paste errors or updates to figures 
made during revision.
While these issues can readily be addressed 
to correct the version of record and in most 
cases do not reflect problems with the overall 
conclusions of the article, these errors — even 
when benign — can cast doubt on the validity 
of a study.
We urge our authors, new and experienced 
alike, to remember that when papers are 
accepted-in-principle we will call for source 
data, as we have done since our first issue 
nearly 10 years ago. We strongly recommend 
that authors be especially mindful of book -
keeping during manuscript preparation and 
pin their underlying source data to figures 
throughout versioning. We also recommend 
that our authors, especially corresponding 
authors, spend time assessing source data 
before hitting ‘submit’ . Moreover, the same 
machine learning models that are being used 
to hunt discrepancies in published source 
data can be used to pre-emptively. Ultimately, 
spending a proportionally trivial amount of 
time during figure preparation and source 
data quality control can save a lot of hassle and 
unnecessary speculation about a paper, and 
more broadly about a research team’s integ-
rity, in the long run.
We value data sharing in its many forms 
(Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4, 845–846; 2020). From 
our editorial perspective, we see very plainly 
that source data are invisible no more. While 
we are actively discussing ways in which we can 
be more proactive in assessing source data, 
we hope that encouraging good bookkeeping 
habits for our authors can help future-proof 
our studies and ensure the quality of the 
papers in our pages.
Published online: 16 September 2026
 Check for updates