Stream restoration is a relatively new scientific field. Currently, there is not a definitive methodology for performing restorations that all professionals in industry and academia can agree upon. This has allowed for multiple ideologies to be developed and altered that vary by geographic location and the professional using them. In addition to the methodologies used, the publicly available design guidance published by state government organizations also varies by regulatory authority, method of analysis, ecoregion, and restoration objectives. In some cases, design guidance is replicated from a different geographical area and may not satisfy local needs or existing site conditions. Since state government organizations are responsible for the regulation and funding of stream restoration projects, guidance documents issued by them are reflective of their unique priorities and objectives for restorations and the information included should be appropriate for use in all phases of a project. To assess the breadth and depth included in guidance documents from across the United States, 53 different sources for guidance and reference material were identified from state-affiliated organizations and were quantified as a part of a national review to identify sources that can be used as a framework for other states to develop their own comprehensive guides. The identified sources came in multiple formats and the breadth and depth of information included in them varied. In the state of Kentucky, there are currently no set guidelines for how to perform restorations and published information on state-specific procedures is scarce. To address this, an interview series was conducted with industry professionals from academic, administrative, consulting, and construction positions to assess what restoration procedures are currently being used in Kentucky and to document their personal insights on the state of the industry and what steps could be taken to increase restoration success rates. 17 professionals were interviewed representing 13 different organizations operating in Kentucky. Despite coming from different backgrounds, these professionals shared common perspectives on the state of the industry, and next steps to improve overall project quality in Kentucky. When executing these projects, the use of heavy equipment can compact riparian soils and alter their hydrologic function. While measures are taken to remediate the soil in preparation for demobilization and vegetation planting after construction, there is not a quantifiable value that can be used as a refence condition for these sites. Since soil compaction can impact both hydrologic function and vegetation establishment, which are key factors in streambank stability and erosion mitigation, this thesis also looked at how cone penetration resistance levels vary by treatment (reforested vs. restored project type) and age since completion. Cone penetration resistance levels were measured using a digital con