Vol.:(0123456789)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-026-38231-8
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Advances in the sample pretreatment for determination 
of microplastics in riverbed sediments by Raman spectroscopy
Andrea Dali1 · Mirco Mancini2 · Daniela Santianni3 · Luca Solari2 · Maurizio Becucci1,4 
Received: 11 June 2026 / Accepted: 10 September 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Microplastics (MPs) represent an important global environmental threat, and, among the different environmental compart-
ments, the aquatic systems are particularly impacted by the MPs problem. River sediments act as sinks and as major pathways 
for MPs transportation to marine systems. Therefore, there is an increasing need for comprehensive, basin-scale monitoring of 
MPs in river sediments to elucidate their spatial and temporal accumulation patterns, providing data essential for risk assess-
ment and the development of effective mitigation strategies by stakeholders. MPs extraction from complex environmental 
samples remains challenging as the presence of organic and inorganic matter often interferes with the analytical identification. 
To address this gap, we optimized a low-cost, high-throughput sample preparation protocol specifically designed for analysis 
of large riverine sediment sets and accurate Raman identification. The protocol was validated across a wide cross-section of 
sediment matrices, from the Arno River (Pisa and Florence, Italy) with different grain size distribution and organic matter 
concentrations. This validation, with both spiked matrices and real environmental sediments, demonstrates a workflow that 
is tailored to handle sediments rich in organic and inorganic matter while enabling accurate identification of MPs.
Keywords Microplastic extraction · Microplastic quantification · Raman spectroscopy · Arno River · River sediment · 
Sample pretreatment
Introduction
Global plastic production has increased dramatically over 
the past decades, rising from approximately 2 million metric 
tons in 1950 to 390.7 million metric tons in 2021 (Plastics 
Europe 2022). This dramatic growth is largely driven by the 
low cost, versatility, and high durability of plastic materials 
(Thompson et al. 2009). However, since most plastics are 
non-biodegradable, their widespread production has resulted 
in the accumulation of vast amounts of persistent waste, 
much of which is inadequately managed and eventually 
released into the environment (Geyer et al. 2017; Cottom 
et al. 2024). Macroplastics (MAPs, dimensions > 25 mm) 
released into the environment undergo progressive fragmen-
tation due to physical weathering and photodegradation, 
leading to the formation of mesoplastics (MEPs, dimensions 
between 5 and 25 mm) and microplastics (MPs, dimensions 
between 1 µm and 5 mm) (Julienne et al. 2019; Andrady 
2022; Rambacher et al. 2023). MPs are typically defined 
as solid polymer-containing particles ranging from 1 µm to 
5 mm in size, excluding (bio)degradable polymers (Euro-
pean Chemicals Agency (ECHA) 2019). Based on their 
origin, MPs are classified as primary, intentionally manu-
factured at microscopic sizes, or secondary, which originate 
from the fragmentation of larger plastic debris (Emberson-
Marl et al. 2023; Nikhil et al. 2024). Consequently, MPs in 
natural environments exhibit considerable diversity in poly-
mer types, shapes, color and particle sizes (Kooi et al. 2021).
Responsible Editor: Thomas D. Bucheli
Andrea Dali and Mirco Mancini contributed equally to this work.
 * Maurizio Becucci 
 maurizio.becucci@unifi.it
1 Department of Chemistry “Ugo Schiff” (DICUS), 
University of Florence, Via Della Lastruccia 3-13, 
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, FI, Italy
2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of Florence, Via Santa Marta 3, 50139 Florence, 
Italy
3 Publiacqua S.P.A., Via Villamagna 90C, 50126 Florence, 
Italy
4 INSTM, Research Unit of Florence, Via Della Lastruccia 3, 
50019 Sesto Fiorentino, FI, Italy
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Among all environmental compartments, aquatic sys-
tems are particularly impacted by plastic pollution (Schmidt 
et al. 2017a, b; Lebreton et al. 2022). It is estimated that, 
in 2015 alone, between 4.8 and 12.7 million metric tons 
of plastic waste entered the oceans from terrestrial sources 
(Jambeck et al. 2015). Freshwater environments, including 
rivers, lakes, streams, wetlands, and groundwater, serve both 
as sinks and as major pathways for MPs transportation to 
marine systems (Dris et al. 2015; D’ Avignon et al. 2022; 
Dalvand and Hamidian 2023; Dikareva and Simon 2024; 
Xu et al. 2024). Once in the aquatic environment, MPs can 
adversely affect organisms that ingest plastic debris, induc-
ing physical and chemical stress that impacts feeding behav-
ior, energy metabolism, and reproductive success (Cole et al. 
2013, 2019; Gardon et al. 2018; Covernton et al. 2021; Jew-
ett et al. 2022). Moreover, MPs can act as vectors for toxic 
substances, including persistent organic pollutants (POPs) 
and heavy metals, which bioaccumulate in the food chain, 
posing risks to aquatic organisms and ultimately humans 
(Ding et al. 2022; Okoye et al. 2022; Tumwesigye et al. 
2023). These considerations underscore the importance of 
large-scale mapping of MPs to determine their spatial and 
temporal accumulation patterns in riverine sediments and to 
enable accurate quantification necessary for environmental 
risk assessment.
However, collecting, handling, identifying, and character-
izing MPs from environmental samples remains challenging 
due to their small size and the high diversity in shape, color, 
density, and physical–chemical properties. This is especially 
true in aquatic environments, where particle buoyancy, bio-
fouling processes, aggregation with organic and inorganic 
matter, and continuous transport driven by currents and tur-
bulence significantly influence their distribution, transforma-
tion, and detectability. Currently, the primary methods for 
MP identification rely on vibrational spectroscopy, namely 
Raman spectroscopy (RS) and Fourier-transform infrared 
(FT-IR) spectroscopy, which are favored due to their non-
destructive nature and ability to discriminate between plastic 
and natural particles (Vianello et al. 2018; Chakraborty et al. 
2023; Monnanni et al. 2024). Simpler techniques based on 
selective staining, such as Nile Red, are less specific and 
can interfere with spectroscopic analyses due to fluorescence 
(Stanton et al. 2019; Sancataldo et al. 2020; Prasad et al. 
2024). Particularly, microRaman is a fast, non-destructive 
and non-contact method capable of providing both chemi-
cal and morphological information (Nava and Leoni 2021; 
Chakraborty et al. 2023; Kumar et al. 2026). Moreover, RS 
can also identify pigments, dyes and other additives (Casa-
dio et al. 2010; Lin and Chang 2022; Kumar et al. 2026). Its 
popularity has increased with the availability of efficient, 
cost-effective laser sources and detectors, and its use of vis-
ible radiation allows it to surpass the 10-µm diffraction limit 
of micro-FTIR spectroscopy (Chakraborty et al. 2023).
Although MPs have been studied extensively in diverse 
water bodies and sediments (Scopetani et al. 2020; Liu et al. 
2020; Jiao et al. 2021; Chakraborty et al. 2023; Simon-
Sánchez et al. 2024), there is still no standardized, robust pro-
tocol for sampling and analysis (Hermsen et al. 2018; Kumar 
et al. 2026) in complex matrices. As a result, field studies 
often produce non-comparable results. In addition to accu-
racy, methods must be rapid and cost-effective to allow for 
extensive sampling campaigns over large spatial and tempo-
ral scales. Sample preparation is particularly critical for sedi-
ments, which are important sinks for MPs and key indicators 
of long-term accumulation (Hidalgo-Ruz et al. 2012; Liu et al. 
2020). Sediments are challenging due to their intrinsic site-
specific composition, being a mixture of light organic matter 
and fine inorganic particles, which can trap MPs and hinder 
recovery. Multi-step extraction protocols are often required, 
including oxidation, density separation, enzymatic digestion, 
and filtration (Hidalgo-Ruz et al. 2012; Simon-Sánchez et al. 
2024; Kumar et al. 2026). However, while effective, these are 
time-consuming and expensive. Alternative faster approaches, 
such as electrostatic or magnetic separation and oil-based 
extraction methods, have been proposed (Felsing et al. 2018; 
Grbic et al. 2019; Scopetani et al. 2020), yet these may be 
incompatible with RS due to residual materials generating 
fluorescence or sample handling difficulties. Also, other two-
phase system-based approaches have been recently proposed 
as alternative MPs extraction methods from seawater, beach 
sand, and marine sediments. These separation techniques suc-
cessfully isolate MPs by effectively partitioning them away 
from common natural biopolymer interferents (Liu et al. 2022, 
2024; Chang et al. 2023).
To date, to the best of our knowledge, a rapid, low-cost, 
and sediment-specific extraction protocol compatible with 
microRaman analysis has not yet been reported. However, 
high-throughput methods are mandatory to have large-scale 
monitoring programs of the MPs concentration in riverine 
systems (i.e., to evaluate the temporal dynamics of MP pol-
lution). To address this gap, we optimized a sample prepara-
tion protocol specifically for riverine sediments, addressing 
the limitations of existing methods. Preliminary experiments 
were conducted using spiked test sediments and environmental 
samples from the Arno River (at locations in Pisa and Flor-
ence, Italy), demonstrating a workflow that is reasonably fast, 
inexpensive, and tailored for sediments rich in organic and 
inorganic matter while enabling accurate RS analysis of MPs.
Materials and methods
Sediment sampling and characterization
Environmental sediment samples were obtained through the 
sampling of riverbed sediments from the Arno River along 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
the stretch that flows through the cities of Florence (five 
samples, sampling location N1) and Pisa (one sample, sam-
pling location N2) (Italy) in June 2025 (Figure S1). This 
river was selected as suitable for three main reasons: (i) the 
availability of previous studies investigating MP concentra-
tions both in the water column (Monnanni et al. 2024) and 
in bottom sediments (Rimondi et al. 2022; Ghinassi et al. 
2023) in its nearby areas, as well as in treated wastewa-
ter discharged into it by local wastewater treatment plants 
(Becucci et al. 2022), albeit using sampling and analytical 
methodologies different from those proposed in this study; 
(ii) the strong presence of industrial and tourism-related 
activities characterizing the area, potentially generating a 
wide variety of polymer types detectable in the aquatic 
environment; (iii) the presence of riverbed sediments with 
highly heterogeneous grain size distributions, ranging from 
silts and clays to coarse sands and fine gravel (Figure S2). 
Additionally, sediment sampling was conducted during the 
summer season, under mean discharge conditions of the 
order of 10–20 m3 s ⁻1 (Peruzzi et al. 2019), and in the 
absence of rainfall during the 48 h preceding sampling. 
Under these low-flow conditions and in areas character -
ized by slow or nearly stagnant flow, a maximization of 
organic matter accumulation in bottom sediments is gener -
ally observed, deriving both from the deposition of alloch-
thonous plant detritus and from locally produced biomass 
(Vannote et al. 1980; Naiman and Décamps 1997).
Each of the sampling points was identified in advance 
using cartography (Google Maps) and a portable GPS 
device (Garmin GPSMAP 66i) for field-based georeferenc-
ing by testing different distances from the riverbank, vary -
ing water depths, and sites characterized by different sedi-
ment grain size distributions. The samples were collected 
by using a stainless steel Van Veen gravity corer, capable 
of sampling an area of 400 cm2 to a depth of approxi-
mately 15 cm (equivalent to a sediment volume of 6 dm3). 
The samples were immediately stirred and transferred 
into a 250-ml glass container and subsequently stored in 
a refrigerator, away from light, to prevent alteration of the 
sediment matrix due to algal growth.
Before laboratory analysis, the sediment samples were 
placed in an aluminum container and dried in an oven at 
90 °C for 24 h, weighed, and sieved using stainless steel 
sieves with mesh sizes between 5 and 1 mm. All materials 
above 1 mm, occasionally found, were retained for sepa-
rate inspection. This preliminary sieving process facili-
tates the visual identification of larger MPs (≥ 1 mm) and 
removes coarser organic components (e.g., twigs, leaves, 
shells) typically present in streambed sediments. The 
removed coarser organic components were washed with 
filtered demineralized water and transferred to the sample 
ready for the extraction methods (see Chapter 2.3 Extrac-
tion methods) to release the potentially trapped MPs.
In parallel, a subsample of the dried sediment was used to 
determine grain size distribution by combining conventional 
sieve analysis, performed with a standard ASTM sieve stack 
for the coarse fraction (d50 > 500 µm), with laser scatter -
ing particle size analysis (LISST-PORTABLE XR, SN 709, 
Sequoia®) for smaller fraction (d50 < 500 µm).
Organic carbon determination
To quantify the organic fraction interfering with the MPs 
determination, the total amount of organic carbon was 
measured on the sediment fraction passing through the pre-
liminary 1–5-mm sieve. By excluding the coarser organic 
debris, this method evaluated only the organic load that 
could potentially hide MPs and affect the efficiency of the 
MPs extraction protocol. The organic carbon of each sample 
was determined using an elemental analyzer (FLASH EA 
1112, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Milan, Italy).
Extraction methods
For each sample, approximately 30 g of pre-sieved sediments 
were put in a glass beaker together with 30 ml of filtered 
demineralized water. The filtered demineralized water was 
obtained by filtering demineralized water using Whatman 
filter papers (grade 2, 8  μm pore diameter) to remove any 
MPs or other solid contaminants present in the water. The 
efficiency of MP removal from water was tested by preparing 
blank samples (see below). The samples were first sonicated 
for 5 min at 35 kHz (Astrason, Farmingdale, USA) to expose 
the MPs and then oxidized using a Fenton protocol slightly 
modified from that reported in Refs. (Qin et al. 2015; Sco-
petani et al. 2020). In particular, we added in the beaker the 
Fenton reagents (60 ml of 30% H2O2 (Carlo Erba); 6 ml of 
a 2 mM solution of FeSO4
.7H2O (Sigma Aldrich); 6 ml of a 
2 mM solution of acetic acid (Sigma Aldrich)). The reaction 
was kept at 35 °C for 1 week or until the reaction stops, i.e., 
no more foam was formed even upon further H2O2 addi-
tion (Liu et al. 2019; Simon-Sánchez et al. 2024). Then, the 
samples were filtered (Whatman filter papers, grade 2, 8 μm 
pore diameter) to remove the separate solid from the rea-
gent solutions. The material remaining on the filter was then 
recovered by backwashing it and density separated using a 
saturated NaCl aqueous solution. Visual inspection under 
a UV lamp was performed to ensure the complete absence 
of residual MPs on the filter. The saturated NaCl solution 
was prepared by dissolving NaCl in water until saturation 
was reached (338 g/l) and then filtered using Whatman filter 
papers (8 μm pore diameter) to remove MPs or other solid 
contaminants. The sample was first shaken for 1 min and 
then left to settle for 4 h (Hidalgo-Ruz et al. 2012). After 
4 h, the floating fraction was recovered and solids were col-
lected by filtration (Whatman filter, 8-μm pore diameter) and 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
washed with filtered demineralized water to remove the salt. 
Since Fenton oxidation leaves some organic residues in the 
samples a subsequent separation using a custom-made glass 
separator was implemented. In the glass separator (Fig.  1, 
panels a and b) the filtered materials are in contact with a 
biphasic liquid system made of water and cyclohexane. As 
shown in Fig. 1, panels c and d, MPs are preferentially sus-
pended in the organic phase, while residuals of vegetables 
are more likely to remain in contact with water. We operate 
as follows, under the fume hood: 2 ml of cyclohexane (Carlo 
Erba) were added into the lower part of the separator, then 
the sample recovered from the filter was added using about 
Fig. 1 Custom-made glass separator for microplastics (MPs) extrac-
tion. a Schematic representation of the device, consisting of separa-
ble upper and lower parts, each part with an independent tap (namely 
upper and lower, respectively). The system is connected to a filtered 
demineralized water reservoir and includes an air inlet, and a water 
drain and inlet port. b Photograph of the assembled glass separator. 
c Close-up photograph of a spiked sediment sample suspended in 
water. d Photograph of the same sample after addition of cyclohexane 
and mixing. MPs selectively move into the upper non-polar cyclohex-
ane phase, while residual organic matter remains in the lower water 
phase
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
5 ml of water and 0.1 ml of a 3 mM solution of sodium 
dodecyl sulfate—SDS (Sigma Aldrich). The surfactant (i.e., 
the SDS) was used to minimize the adhesive forces between 
MPs and sediment matrix and therefore, to increase the effi-
ciency of the extraction. Following, enough filtered demin-
eralized water was added to fill up about ⅔ of the lower part 
volume. The water was added taking care to generate enough 
turbulence to mix the sample. After this step, the upper part 
of the separator was mounted and, from the bottom valve, 
filtered demineralized water was added to push the organic 
phase, carrying MPs, upwards and overpass the top valve. 
Once the desired level was reached in the upper section, the 
top valve and the water inlet were closed in sequence; then, 
the drain valve was opened and finally, air (from the air inlet) 
was allowed to enter making water (in the glass separator) 
to drain from the bottom valve. Once the liquid level drops 
below the lower section, the upper part of the glassware was 
removed and the sample recovered in a clean beaker. The 
particles possibly trapped in the glass joint (i.e., between 
the upper and lower parts) were remixed, using water, in the 
residual sample. The process, including SDS addition, was 
repeated three times to improve the MP recovery. Finally, 
the sample collected was filtered using a cellulose nitrate 
filter with 5 µm pore size (Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmnH 
- Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung) and transferred 
into a clean glass Petri dish. Still, operating under the fume 
hood, after solvent evaporation, samples were stored in a 
clean glass Petri dish (with cover) at room temperature while 
waiting for the RS investigation. The cellulose nitrate filter 
was used for the final filtration of the sample as it does not 
interfere with the Raman characterization of MPs, and it 
has a low price.
Method validation for MPs determination
The efficiency and capability of the proposed extraction 
method to separate the MPs from complex matrices was 
evaluated through a two-step validation process on real sedi-
ment samples from the Arno River. Each of these sediment 
samples was divided into two 30 g aliquots. The first ali-
quot was spiked with reference particles and, after applying 
the extraction protocol, the recovered MPs were counted to 
evaluate the extraction efficiency within a real environmental 
matrix. Recovery efficiency was calculated as the recovery 
fraction (the fraction of particles successfully retrieved after 
the extraction process). The second aliquot was processed 
to quantify the actual environmental MPs concentration, 
thereby demonstrating the efficiency of the method in iso-
lating MPs from other inorganic and organic parts present 
in the sample; identifying and quantifying different types of 
MPs by using Raman spectroscopies technique.
The reference MPs (Sigma Aldrich) made of different 
polymers were used to cover a range of densities (Table S1): 
polyethylene (PE, 0.98 g/cm 3), acrylonitrile butadiene sty -
rene (ABS, 1.01 g/cm3), polyvinyl chloride (PVC, 1.084 g/
cm3), polyamide (PA, 1.14 g/cm3) and polyethylene tereph-
thalate (PET, 1.30 g/cm3). Moreover, to assess the influence 
of particle morphology on recovery rate, other parameters 
were varied (Figure S3 and Table S1): (i) the particle size 
(nominal diameter, Dn, ranged from 388 μm to 1.7 mm); 
(ii) the particle shape through the aspect ratio (AS) ranged 
from 1.02 to 5.26. The values of Dn and AS are obtained 
as the average of the value found on 30 MPs fragments 
between the total MPs used in the test. For each polymer 
in Table S1 the wettability is also reported, expressed as 
the contact angle with water. The values were taken from 
the literature for pristine materials. We made the effort to 
measure the contact angle for cyclohexane on the different 
materials under investigation. For many polymers an almost 
complete spreading was observed, corresponding to a very 
small contact angle (< 5°, not precisely determined), dem-
onstrating the very good affinity of the polymers with this 
solvent. Only for PET, a polymer containing polar groups, 
we were able to directly measure the contact angle with both 
water and cyclohexane (Figure S4). Measurements were per-
formed using 10 µL droplets dispensed using a precision 
pipette. The angles were determined using the ContactAngle 
tool in ImageJ, and each value represents the average of five 
independent measurements for each liquid. The measured 
water contact angle on PET (78° ± 0.7°) is in good align-
ment with reference data in the literature (81°) (Ellison and 
Zisman 1954) while the contact angle for cyclohexane was 
much lower (19° ± 3.7°), demonstrating a larger affinity for 
the organic solvent compared to water even for this material.
Measures adopted to minimize cross‑ and external 
contamination
To avoid problems of cross- and external contamination, 
sampling was conducted using plastic-free equipment and 
the experiment was performed in a controlled and clean 
environment. All glassware was rinsed at least three times 
with filtered demineralized water and detergent prior to use, 
wiped using lint-free wipers, and immediately covered with 
aluminum foil and watch glasses when not in active use (Dris 
et al. 2018; Brander et al. 2020; Becucci et al. 2022; Kumar 
et al. 2026). Moreover, the number of samples transferred 
between different containers was minimized. To avoid self-
contamination during sampling, pre-treatment and analysis 
of samples laboratory staff used only cotton clothes, particle-
free nitrile gloves and, moreover fleece clothing and plastic 
items were strictly avoided (Hermsen et al. 2018; Witzig 
et al. 2020; Becucci et al. 2022; Kumar et al. 2026). As the 
cellulose nitrate filters can be contaminated even before their 
first use, they were blown with a jet of filtered compressed 
air before sample filtration. Further, two sets of three blank 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
samples were prepared together with the samples to check 
for contamination. No MPs larger than 20 µm (the smaller 
dimension we target in our analysis) were found in any of 
the blanks and, therefore, no mathematical blank correction 
or subtraction protocol was necessary.
Hyperspectral imaging and Raman analysis, 
identification, and quantification
Preliminarily, RGB and fluorescence (370 nm excitation) 
images of the filter holding the sample were collected, 
using an ordinary digital camera Canon EOS250D with 
UV-filtered macro-optics, to support the operations under 
the microscope. As described in Becucci et al. 2022, these 
images were combined and processed using ImageJ software 
to highlight particles present on the filter (for an example, 
see Fig. 5). This screening analysis identified larger dimen-
sion MP candidates.
Raman analysis was conducted using a microRaman 
spectrometer RM2000 (Renishaw, Wotton-under-Edge, UK) 
equipped with Olympus microscope objective (5x/0.10 N.A., 
20x/0.40 N.A. and 50x/0.80 N.A.) and a 785-nm diode. 
Samples were put on computer-controlled motorized stage 
(accuracy 1 µm) and, using a ×20 microscope objective, all 
MP candidates were investigated. Moreover, the entire fil-
ters were scanned using a ×5 microscope objective to detect 
any additional particulates with dimensions above 20 μm. 
This dimensional limit was set given the natural background 
particles found in the samples and the filtration step with 
stainless grid. For each selected particle, both picture (with 
calibrated axes) and Raman spectrum were recorded. The 
Raman spectra wavenumber scale was routinely calibrated 
on the 520  cm−1 first-order Raman band of bulk silicon: 
wavenumber accuracy along the full spectrum is 2  cm−1 and 
the spectral resolution is 5  cm−1.
The chemical composition of the particles was obtained 
based on their Raman spectrum upon elaboration on the web 
by using the open-source program OpenSpecy and its asso-
ciated libraries (https:// www. opena nalys is. org/ opens pecy/) 
(Cowger et al. 2025). All raw Raman spectra underwent a 
standardized preprocessing protocol within the software, 
consisting of baseline correction and min–max intensity 
normalization. For the identification, a dual-verification 
approach was employed: (i) the correlation ranking gener -
ated by OpenSpecy was utilized as an initial screening tool; 
(ii) a visual inspection was conducted by an operator to con-
firm the overlap of the main vibrational bands between the 
experimental and reference spectra.
Since H2O2 oxidation can potentially degrade MPs 
(Kumar et al. 2026), a stability test was performed on 
purchased MPs (see Chapter 2.4 Method validation for 
MPs determination). It was verified that the Raman spec-
tra recorded both before and after the extraction protocols 
were identical (data not shown). Furthermore, no changes 
in the dimensions, shape and morphology of the MPs were 
observed, confirming their integrity after the process (data 
not shown).
Results and discussion
Development of the methods
The analysis of MPs in river sediments is essential, as fluvial 
ecosystems are recognized as major drivers of microparti-
cles toward seas, including highly impacted basins such as 
the Mediterranean Sea (Cantasano 2022). Moreover, sedi-
ments act as a significant sink for MPs (Weber and Lech-
thaler 2021; Rohais et al. 2024; Mancini et al. 2025). Pro-
tocols commonly used for water samples with low contents 
of total suspended solids, such as drinking water or clean 
fluvial water, are inadequate for sediment matrices. In fact, 
the recovery and identification of MPs from river sediments 
are significantly more complicated due to the abundance of 
organic and inorganic material, which interferes with the 
analysis and cannot be easily removed by density separation 
alone. Several sediment-preparation protocols are reported 
in the literature (Hidalgo-Ruz et al. 2012 ) and generally 
rely on the method proposed by Thompson and co-worker 
(Thompson et al. 2004). These protocols make use of siev -
ing, density separation and filtration and were applied prin-
cipally for marine and beach sediments or, in general, sedi-
ments characterized by low organic contents (Hidalgo-Ruz 
et al. 2012) (Fig. 2a). However, when dealing with organic-
rich river sediments, these basic steps are insufficient. Con-
sequently, for such matrices, chemical digestion and oxida-
tion are required to eliminate the organic contaminants (such 
as proteins, carbohydrates, and fats) that commonly interfere 
with subsequent steps for the MPs chemical identification. 
Oxidation is generally carried out through Fenton protocols, 
whereas complete removal of the organic material requires 
further efforts, such as enzymatic digestion using different 
enzymes like protease or cellulase. For instance, a multi-
step protocol, requiring approximately 24 days, was recently 
applied to sediments from the Limfjord River in Denmark 
(Simon-Sánchez et al. 2024) (Fig. 2d).
Recently, a method was also proposed to analyze MPs 
in marine sediments without pretreatments (Fig.  2e) (Rossi 
et al. 2024). But this protocol, as admitted by the authors, 
investigates a small amount of sediments (1 g) on each anal-
ysis and it has some disadvantages such as the need for expe-
rienced users and high-quality and high-cost instruments not 
easily available in laboratories.
Alternative simpler high-throughput techniques, such 
as dye staining methods (e.g., using Nile Red—NR—and 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
fluorescence microscopy), are applicable for clean matri-
ces like bottled water, but are not suitable for organic-rich 
samples. On one hand, organic-rich samples leave residual 
organic matter or cellular lipids that co-stain with NR, lead-
ing to potential false positives and interfering with the accu-
rate screening of MPs (Chatterjee et al. 2023; Villa et al. 
2025). On the other hand, it has already been proved that the 
oxidative step can lead to the presence of oxidized groups on 
the MPs surface resulting in a shifted fluorescence emission 
from the staining dye (Idehara et al. 2025). Furthermore, 
residual natural organic matter leads to an intrinsic fluores-
cence background in the RS experiments. The problem of 
fluorescence background in Raman spectra can be handled 
by time-gated (Kotula et al. 2022) or shifted excitation meth-
ods (Xue et al. 2024). However, these approaches require 
specialized and expensive instruments. As a representative 
example, Figure S5 showed the significantly increased noise 
level of the Raman spectrum (baseline subtracted) meas-
ured on NR-stained ABS particles with respect to that meas-
ured on pristine ABS due to the shot noise associated to 
the high level of fluorescence background. A similar effect 
was observed also for other polymers (data not shown) as 
the fluorescence interference is not directly associated to 
the polymer chemical nature but to the dyes possibly pre-
sent (either added in the sample preparation step as staining 
or used during the polymer production). While this back -
ground is already problematic on this stained reference MPs, 
it makes the identification of smaller environmental MPs 
practically impossible.
Other methods reported in literature need particular instru-
mentation to separate soil and aquatic sediments from MPs, 
such as magnetic separation, pressurized liquid extraction, 
and therefore are not ideal to be applied to monitor high num-
ber of samples with operative low cost. Another possibility, 
not relying on particular instrumentation, is represented by 
the method based on oil leaching. Here the hydrophobic affin-
ity between oil and MPs makes the MPs migrate in the oil 
phase where they can be extracted (Huang et al. 2024). How-
ever, traditional funnels can be clogged by solid samples, 
requiring more advanced systems. For example, Kononov 
Fig. 2 Overview of sample pre-treatment protocols for MP analy -
sis in soils and sediments. Schematic comparison of methodolo-
gies proposed, ordered chronologically, by a Ref. Hidalgo-Ruz et al. 
(2012), b Ref. Scopetani et al. (2020), c Ref. Kononov et al. (2022), 
d Ref. Simon-Sánchez et al. (2024), e Ref. Rossi et al. (2024) and f 
this paper. The blue, yellow, and green colors indicated the chemi-
cal, mechanical, and physical process, respectively. Estimated pro-
cessing times, indicated in figure, does not consider sampling, drying 
and weighting steps. The filtration steps are not reported in the figure; 
exception is made for protocol e where it was the only preparation 
step performed
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
and coworkers used a combination of an extraction method 
in canola oil and a density separation (NaCl) together with 
 H2O2 oxidation after extraction (Fig.  2c) (Kononov et al. 
2022). This method was then improved by Li and coworkers 
by optimization of the oil–water ratio and by creating micro-
emulsions (Li et al. 2023). However, these were applied on 
commercial products (toothpaste and tea) or simple aqueous 
samples (seawater or soil supernatant). Differently, in 2020, 
Scopetani and coworkers developed a non-density based, 
inexpensive, simple and safe extraction method for sediment 
preparation (Scopetani et al. 2020). Their method, optimized 
for FT-IR analysis, achieved high recovery rate by combin-
ing the Fenton oxidation with an oil-assisted extraction step 
(Fig. 2b). While faster, economical and capable of recover-
ing high-density polymers, we found that in our organic-rich 
samples, organic debris tended to collect at the water–oil 
interface making their removal quite difficult, trapping MPs 
and hindering recovery. Moreover, also after water and hex-
ane rinsing, the olive oil residues on the filter were fluores-
cent and, therefore, prevented the RS identification of MPs 
(for example see Figure S6). This highlights a significant 
limitation of oil-assisted methods coupled with RS. Simi-
larly, recent advances in two-phase system-based approaches, 
such as aqueous two-phase systems and advanced surfactant-
driven biphasic extraction, have achieved efficient MPs isola-
tion from substrates like seawater, beach sand, and marine 
sediments by removing natural biopolymers like chitin, 
lignin, and cellulose (Liu et al. 2022, 2024; Chang et al. 
2023). However, the application of these protocols to highly 
cohesive, organic-rich riverbed sediments showing severe 
particle aggregation is still to be proved.
To enable MP identification by RS, we modified the origi-
nal olive oil method by replacing olive oil with cyclohex-
ane. Cyclohexane was selected over other non-polar sol-
vents because it yields a good MP recovery (Fig.  1 and see 
Chapter 3.2 Tested recovery of MPs), does not stick to the 
glassware, does not increase the fluorescence background 
of both filters and MPs and it is easily removed by evapora-
tion. Cyclohexane is a solvent with very high optical trans-
parency as its electronic absorption spectrum starts around 
200–210 nm. Therefore, with visible light excitation there 
is no optical absorption and fluorescence emission. This is 
especially true for Cyclohexane Spectroscopic Grade; how-
ever also the solvent at Reagent grade could be satisfactorily 
used for this application as its major impurity is benzene and 
that will affect only its properties for ultraviolet excitation at 
wavelength below 270 nm, very far off the visible range. Its 
optical transparency is related to its structure and electronic 
properties, cyclohexane being a saturated, symmetrical ali-
phatic hydrocarbon, and as such it does not contain con-
jugated electrons or heteroatoms. Cyclohexane, due to the 
above-described properties, even if present into the sample 
(unlikely, due to its high volatility) does not generate its own 
fluorescence signal (background noise) in the near UV-Vis-
ible range maximizing instrument sensitivity even for very 
weak signals in Raman scattering experiments. Furthermore, 
unlike solvents containing heavy atoms (such as dichlo -
romethane or chloroform) or reactive functional groups, 
cyclohexane is chemically inert under analytical conditions. 
Therefore, free radicals (possibly present in the sample, from 
the previous Fenton oxidation step) are less prone to induce 
solvent chemical degradation which could lead to fluoresc-
ing residues. Although cyclohexane from a safety, health 
and environmental point of view is ranked as “problematic” 
(i.e., it can be used in the lab but its implementation in the 
production scale will require specific measures) (Alder et al. 
2016; Prat et al. 2016), with a known aquatic toxicity (acute 
and chronic), its impact in our protocol is mitigated by the 
small volume of solvent used for each sample (total 6 ml). 
Additionally, the recovery of the frozen organic phase in the 
original method proved to be challenging given the residual 
organic material still present in our samples after the oxida-
tion step. A custom-made glass extractor was designed to 
overcome these difficulties (Fig.  1) and to avoid freezing 
the sample as in Ref. (Scopetani et al. 2020). Crucially, this 
custom-made separator was also designed to significantly 
minimize chemical cyclohexane waste. Finally, the specific 
properties of our samples (i.e., the high content of mineral 
sediments and natural organic residues) led us to introduce a 
preliminary density separation step in the protocol (Fig. 2f). 
The proposed protocol was tested in the laboratory to evalu-
ate its efficiency and suitability for RS based identification.
Tested recovery of MPs
To evaluate the efficiency of the overall proposed proto -
col, we tested the method on different spiked environmen-
tal samples where an exact number of MPs was mixed 
with real sediment samples collected from the Arno River 
in the city center of Florence and Pisa (see Chapter 2. 
Materials and methods). These samples exhibit different 
grain size distributions, ranging from fine/medium silts 
 (D50 = 0.01 mm) and coarse silts (D50 = 0.24 mm) to coarse 
gravel (D50 = 39.98 mm), together with different organic 
carbon contents (0.14–2.2%). Therefore, they represent a 
cross-section of different riverine environments that can 
be found in analyzing real riverine sediments. Efficiency 
was measured as the MP recovery fraction, expressed as 
the ratio of recovered to initially added MPs in the testing 
samples. In the flotation step (Fig. 3a), the overall efficiency 
was 0.70 ± 0.19 with significant variations based on poly -
mer density. As expected, higher recovery was found for 
the low (PE: 0.85 ± 0.08) and medium (PVC: 0.79 ± 0.09) 
density polymers. For high-density polymers (PET), the effi-
ciency dropped at 0.46 ± 0.06. Looking then at the overall 
process (Fig. 3b), this trend was maintained with an overall 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
efficiency of 0.65 ± 0.19 and an efficiency of 0.82 ± 0.08, 
0.72 ± 0.09 and 0.42 ± 0.06 for the low, medium and high-
density polymers, respectively. It is evident that the limiting 
factor is the flotation step and, in particular, the 1.2 g/cm 3 
density of the saturated NaCl aqueous solution.
In this flotation agent, high-density polymers (like PET) 
float only thanks to the presence of air microbubbles or other 
physical factors (e.g., stabilizing surface forces) (Pita and 
Castilho 2020). While higher density salt solutions (such 
as NaI or ZnCl2) could help to overcome this problem, they 
were excluded due to their higher costs, toxicity and prob-
lematic handling of large volumes of hazardous reactants 
(Kedzierski et al. 2017; Rodrigues et al. 2020; Huang et al. 
2024; Jefroy et al. 2026). In detail, ZnCl2 is highly ecotoxic 
(Huang et al. 2024) and its corrosiveness can affect flotation 
efficiency (Elkhatib and Oyanedel-Craver 2020; Huang et al. 
2024) while NaI requires energy-intensive recycling proce-
dures to be economically viable (Kedzierski et al. 2017). 
In fact, NaCl is still one of the most used salts (Hidalgo-
Ruz et al. 2012; Miller et al. 2017). Consequently, while 
the proposed method yields highly quantitative recovery 
rates for low and medium-density polymers, it should be 
considered semi-quantitative for high-density polymers 
(density above 1.2 g/cm3). We accepted this as a necessary 
trade-off to maintain a cost-effective and simple implemen-
tation protocol. This compromise is also justified by the fact 
that the majority of MPs found in aquatic environments are 
characterized by densities below 1.2 g/cm 3 (Kooi and Koe-
lmans 2019). On the overall global plastic production only 
approximately 13% are polymers with densities higher than 
this threshold (Ben Stride et al. 2024). Thus, the optimized 
protocol remains highly representative and effective for 
monitoring the most prevalent environmental MPs.
The recovery rate was also affected by the sediment matrix 
(Fig. 3). In detail, for all the tested polymers, the highest MPs 
recovery rate was achieved in medium and coarse sand matri-
ces while a strong decrease was observed for finer sediments 
(fine sand and coarse silt). This pattern can be attributed to 
the physical and physicochemical properties of fine-grained 
sediments. In particular, finer particles tend to exhibit greater 
surface area to volume ratio and cohesiveness, which enhance 
the adsorption and entrapment of MPs within the sediment 
matrix. Additionally, the increased presence of clay and silt 
fractions promotes aggregation processes, thereby reduc -
ing the efficiency of density-based separation methods. As 
a result, MPs embedded within fine, cohesive sediments are 
less likely to detach and float during the extraction proce-
dure, leading to lower apparent recovery rates. This high-
lights the importance of testing protocols on real, diverse 
matrices. Moreover, this aspect makes it difficult to compare 
our efficiency results to the data present in literature for other 
protocols as this aspect is generally neglected.
Fig. 3 Microplastic recovery fraction for polyethylene (PE), polyvi-
nyl chloride (PVC) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET). Results are 
shown for a the flotation process and b the overall process tested for 
different types of sediment. Also, densities of the polymers (g/cm 3) 
are indicated. Numerical values are reported in Table S2
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
To isolate the efficiency of the proposed cyclohexane 
affinity extraction step respect to the polymers’ charac-
teristics we evaluated its efficiency across different poly -
mers (PE, PVC, PA and PET) with different wettability, 
size and AS (Table S1). An overall recovery efficiency 
of 0.89 ± 0.06 was observed with differences between the 
tested polymers (see Table S2 for details). To evaluate the 
relationship between the polymer surface characteristic and 
the recovery efficiency, we plotted the recovery fraction 
over the wettability of the polymers, expressed as the water 
contact angle (Fig.  4a). PA fibers were excluded from this 
evaluation due to their different shape (Table S1), which 
introduces other effects on recovery efficiency. A clear rela-
tionship between the recovery fraction and the wettability 
was found and mathematically modeled by an exponential 
decay fitting. The recovery is maximized for MPs with a 
water contact angle higher than 75–80°, while it decreases 
for more hydrophilic surfaces. This relationship highlights 
the efficiency of our method in a wide range of applications 
and moreover it is suggested the importance of testing MPs 
extraction protocol using polymers with different character-
istics and properties.
To evaluate the effect of particle shape on our extrac-
tion process we plotted the overall recovery fraction against 
the AS of the MPs. In this case only MPs with a density 
both similar to each other and below that of the flotation 
solution used for the separation procedure (1.2 g/cm3) were 
investigated (i.e., PET and ABS were excluded) (Fig. 4b) in 
order also to neglect the limitations related to the NaCl solu-
tion density. No simple mathematic relationship was found 
between the MPs shape and the recovery, maybe due to other 
dimensional and morphological factors that complexly inter-
act. However, a trend was observed suggesting that fibers 
are slightly harder to recover than the spheres or fragments.
Crucially, the lower recovery rate for PVC fragments 
(0.63 ± 0.06) in this specific test (Fig.  4b) should be inter -
preted as a “worst case scenario” validation. This result is 
primarily connected to the sediment characteristic used for 
this evaluation (i.e., fine sand) rather than a failure of the 
extraction itself. Indeed, the extraction efficiency of PVC 
fragments was found to be 0.86 in coarse sand and even 
higher (0.91) in clean matrices (Table S2). Testing the pro-
tocol under such adverse and complex matrix conditions 
underscores the reliability of the method for realistic envi-
ronmental screening.
Raman analysis and MPs identification
The unspiked aliquots of the sediment samples collected 
from the Arno River were processed using our extraction 
protocol to determine the environmental MPs concentration, 
thereby demonstrating the applicability of the method to real 
environmental samples.
Fig. 4 Influence of microplastic characteristics on recovery efficiency. 
a Cyclohexane extraction MP recovery fraction compared to poly -
mer wettability (expressed as contact angle with water). b Overall 
MP recovery fraction compared with the AS of the MPs (Table S1) 
tested in fine sand. Exponential decay (a) and linear (b) fitting was 
presented (gray lines) together with the R2 and p-values. The tested 
polymers were: polyethylene (PE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), acry -
lonitrile-butadiene styrene (ABS), polyamide (PA) and polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET). Numerical values are reported in Table S2
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Initially, RGB and fluorescence (370 nm excitation) 
images of the filter holding the sample were acquired, com-
bined and processed using ImageJ software to detect poten-
tial MPs (Fig. 5). This step sped up the procedure when deal-
ing with reference materials in the screening of separation 
methods. Then, the filters were carefully examined under a 
microscope prior to acquiring the Raman spectra (see Chap-
ter 2. Materials and methods). Notably, when the filters were 
analyzed using microRaman, no trace of cyclohexane or 
fluorescence interference that could affect the identification 
process was observed. An example of the Raman spectrum 
of environmental polypropylene MPs, found in a sample, is 
presented in Fig. 5. In the figure also the successfull match 
with the OpenSpecy reference library was shown.
Overall, in the Arno River samples that we examined 
five different polymers were found: polypropylene (PP), 
polyester (PES), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), poly -
carbonate (PC), and polyethylene (PE) (Table S3). The 
MP concentration, expressed as numerical abundance 
(i.e., number of MPs per grams of dry sediment) varied 
widely ranging from 0.030 items g−1 observed in the fine 
sand sample to 0.653 items g−1 in the coarse gravel sam-
ple (Fig.  6 and Table S3). Across all samples, the median 
was 0.151 items g−1 and the mean was 0.217 ± 0.23 items 
 g−1. The samples analyzed have different organic con-
tents (from 0.15% in medium sand to 2.2% in medium 
silt) and different grain size distributions. In detail, 
the matrices ranged from primarily gravel composition 
Fig. 5 Image processing and Raman identification of microplastics. 
a RGB and c fluorescence (370-nm excitation) images of an ana-
lyzed filter, together with b their overlapped image and g the particle 
detection output of a filter processed using ImageJ software. In the 
figure, it is also represented the d–f RGB, fluorescence, and over -
lapped images of a selected polypropylene (PP) particle. h Raman 
spectrum (black line) of the identified PP particle compared with the 
OpenSpecy reference spectrum (red line) providing the best correla-
tion coefficient
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
(Coarse gravel, D50 39.98 mm), to primarily sand com-
position (Coarse sand, D50 0.610 mm and medium sand, 
 D50 0.460 mm and fine sand, D50 0.247 mm) and primar -
ily silt (Coarse silt, D50 0.023 mm and fine/medium silt, 
 D50 0.015 mm). These findings successfully demonstrate 
the robustness of this extraction method across highly 
heterogeneous riverine sediment matrices with different 
grain size distribution and organic amount.
Although the primary goal of this study was the method-
ological optimization of the protocol, the preliminary data 
allow for a comparison with data previously reported in the 
literature. A direct comparison with Ghinassi et al. (2023), 
who investigated the MPs in the Arno Rivers alternate bars 
upstream Florence has been performed. In Ghinassi et al. 
(2023), MPs were extracted by H2O2 oxidation, density flota-
tion and filtration. The MPs concentration, evaluated by the 
hot needle methods (Ruggero et al. 2020), was in the range of 
0.44–5.68 items g−1, typical of highly polluted rivers, and sig-
nificantly higher compared to our results. However, two major 
points must be evaluated to explain this discrepancy. First 
of all, the matrices investigated are different. The emerged 
sediment bars can capture and trap MPs transported during 
major flood events. Furthermore, also the inherent limitation 
of the hot needle methods must be evaluated. This method 
is well-known to overestimate the MPs concentration due to 
false positives (Beckingham et al. 2023; Gerigny et al. 2024). 
Our results are more consistent with studies of other, smaller, 
Tuscan rivers such as the Osa, Albegna and Ombrone rivers 
(0.045–1.069 items g−1) (Guerranti et al. 2017) or Mugnone 
river (0.5–1.54 items g−1) (Rimondi et al. 2022).
Comparison with other sediment analysis 
techniques
To evaluate the performance of our extraction method, we 
compared it with previously reported protocols (Table  1). 
Our method has some issues connected with the low recov-
ery efficiency of high-density polymers which is connected 
to the use of NaCl for the density separation (as previously 
discussed). However, it presents a significantly higher 
throughput and lower costs. As shown in Table  1, methods 
with higher throughput are limited to sediments with low 
organic content, such as marine sediments. In contrast, pro-
tocols for organic-rich sediments rely on complex enzymatic 
digestion methods or on oil-assisted extraction. However, 
these alternatives either compromise Raman identification or 
drastically increase costs and processing time. For example, 
the enzymatic digestion protocol provides high accuracy, but 
it requires much more time than our protocols.
Overall, our protocol is a compromise for large-scale 
monitoring where high amounts of sample have to be 
investigated. This approach is consistent with the growing 
European regulatory interest in harmonized basin-scale 
monitoring of microplastics within the framework of the 
Water Framework Directive (European Commission 2022; 
Galgani et al. 2024).
Fig. 6 Environmental microplastic distribution in the Arno River. 
Distribution of the different samples according to their grain size dis-
tribution, organic carbon (% of dried weight sample) and microplastic 
occurrence expressed as numerical abundance (number of MP items 
per grams of dry sediment). The grain size distributions are reported 
as percentage of sand, clay and silt (a), or gravel, silt, and sand (b)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Table 1 Comparison of different microplastic extraction protocols. Schematic representation of the proposed method and literature protocols for MPs extraction and identification. The compari-
son evaluates the matrices investigated, the method used to identify MPs, the recovery efficiencies (%), the dimensional range evaluated (in μm), throughput (i.e., the estimated processing time), 
the reagent price (€) and the environmental and health hazard of the chemical used. Information on how these data were obtained is reported in the SI. For sake of the reader, the corresponding 
flowcharts position in Fig. 2 are reported
Sample Method Technique used Recovery 
efficiency 
(%)
Dimension 
evaluated 
(μm)
Throughput (esti-
mated processing 
time)
Reagent price (€) Environmental 
risk
Health hazard 
(toxicity)
Ref
Marine sediments Density separation 
and filtration 
(Fig. 2a)
FT-IR - - High (~1 day) Negligible No No Thompson et al. 
(2004)
Marine sediments Green protocol 
(Fig. 2e)
Optical micros-
copy identifica-
tion (stereomi-
croscopy, SEM, 
EDS, microRa-
man)
- 70–8000 High (< 1 h) Negligible No No Rossi et al. (2024)
Agricultural soils Canola oil and 
unsaturated NaCl 
solution (Fig. 2c)
Incineration 
method
76–98 < 1000 High (< 1 day) ~15 € for 100 g of 
sediments
Low (H2O2) Low (H2O2) Kononov et al. 
(2022)
Soil, compost Olive oil extrac-
tion (Fig. 2b)
FT-IR 89–95 5–1000 High (~3 days) ~30 € for 100 g of 
sediments
Moderate (H2O2, 
hexane)
Moderate (H2O2, 
hexane)
 Scopetani et al. 
(2020)
Estuarine sedi-
ments
Enzymatic diges-
tion (Fig. 2d)
FPA-mFT-IR - 10–5000 Low (~24–
28 days)
~357 € for 100 g 
of sediments
High (ZnCl2, 
 H2O2)
High (ZnCl2, 
 H2O2)
 Simon-Sánchez 
et al. (2024)
River sediments Density separation 
and cyclohex-
ane extraction 
(Fig. 2f)
microRaman 
spectroscopy
42–81 20–5000 Medium (~8 days) ~4,5 € for 100 g of 
sediments
Moderate (H2O2, 
cyclohexane)
Moderate (H2O2, 
cyclohexane)
This paper
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Conclusions
Full evaluation of the MP pollution strongly depends on 
having robust and precise data on its presence in envi-
ronmental samples. Systematic, large-scale monitoring 
of riverine sediments is particularly important for this 
reason. However, the nature of the riverine sediment 
matrices, cohesive and with a high organic matter con -
tent, complicates the analysis and requires adequate 
approaches. Previous protocols are possibly either too 
slow/expensive or not adequate for large-scale applica-
tions on these matrices.
Here, we optimized a highly cost-effective and fast 
method for the investigation of MPs in river sediments 
by Raman spectroscopy. This offers an optimal trade-off 
between processing efficiency, time, and cost. We com-
bined Fenton oxidation with a cyclohexane affinity extrac-
tion to obtain a reduction of processing time and reagent 
costs essential for application to basin-scale studies. This 
paper also represents a step for the harmonization of MPS 
extraction methods. Attention was dedicated to the devel-
opment of a method able to maximize the effectiveness of 
Raman spectroscopy methods by limitation of the fluores-
cence background sources. As further development, other 
solvents should be tested in order to improve effectiveness 
and eco-compatibility in the MPs solvent extraction step 
while keeping the Raman fluorescence background as low 
as possible. Furthermore, we suggest that a different salt 
for density separation could expand the applicability of 
the method to target, if necessary, specific high-density 
polymer MPs.
Abbreviations AS: Aspect ratio; MP: Microplastic; ABS: Acrylonitrile-
butadiene styrene; FT-IR: Fourier-transform infrared; MAPs: Macro-
plastics; MEPs: Mesoplastics; NR: Nile red; PA: Polyamide; PC: Poly-
carbonate; PE:  Polyethylene; PET:  Polyethylene terephthalate; 
PES: Polyester; PP: Polypropylene; POPs: Persistent organic pollut-
ants; PVC: Polyvinyl chloride; RS: Raman spectroscopy
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11356- 026- 38231-8.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to Dr. Maurizio Passaponti and 
the Glassblowing facility of the Department of Chemistry, Univer -
sity of Florence, for their assistance in the realization of the custom-
designed glass separator.
Author contribution Conceptualization: Maurizio Becucci; meth-
odology: Andrea Dali, Mirco Mancini, Maurizio Becucci; formal 
analysis and investigation: Andrea Dali, Mirco Mancini, Daniela 
Santianni, Maurizio Becucci; writing—original draft preparation: 
Andrea Dali, Mirco Mancini, Luca Solari, Maurizio Becucci; 
funding acquisition: Luca Solari; Maurizio Becucci; resources: 
Luca Solari, Maurizio Becucci; supervision: Luca Solari; Maur -
izio Becucci. All authors contributed to the writing—review and 
editing.
Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi 
di Firenze within the CRUI-CARE Agreement. This work was co-
founded by the Northern Apennines River Basin District Authority. 
The support of Ministero delle Imprese e del Made in Italy (MISE) 
(Project, «Studio di applicazioni industriali innovative del grafene» 
GRAFENEX, progetto 131 Decreto n. 0001481 del 08/05/2023, CUP 
B53D23025560001) is acknowledged (A.D.).
Data availability Data and details on the custom-made laboratory 
glassware will be made available upon request.
Declarations 
Ethics approval This is not applicable.
Consent to participate/consent for publication This is not applicable.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Alder CM, Hayler JD, Henderson RK, Redman AM, Shukla L, Shuster 
LE, Sneddon HF (2016) Updating and further expanding GSK’s 
solvent sustainability guide. Green Chem 18(13):3879–3890. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ C6GC0 0611F
Andrady AL (2022) Weathering and fragmentation of plastic debris in 
the ocean environment. Mar Pollut Bull 180:113761. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2022. 113761
Beckingham B, Apintiloaiei A, Moore C, Brandes J (2023) Hot or not: 
systematic review and laboratory evaluation of the hot needle test 
for microplastic identification. Microplastics Nanoplastics 3(1):8. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s43591- 023- 00056-4
Becucci M, Mancini M, Campo R, Paris E (2022) Microplastics in 
the Florence wastewater treatment plant studied by a continuous 
sampling method and Raman spectroscopy: a preliminary inves-
tigation. Sci Total Environ 808:152025. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
scito tenv. 2021. 152025
Brander SM, Renick VC, Foley MM, Steele C, Woo M, Lusher A, Carr 
S, Helm P, Box C, Cherniak S, Andrews RC, Rochman CM (2020) 
Sampling and quality assurance and quality control: a guide for 
scientists investigating the occurrence of microplastics across 
matrices. Appl Spectrosc 74(9):1099–1125. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1177/ 00037 02820 945713
Cantasano N (2022) Marine pollution by microplastics in the Medi-
terranean Sea. J Mar Sci Eng 10(7):858. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
jmse1 00708 58
Casadio F, Leona M, Lombardi JR, Van Duyne R (2010) Identifica -
tion of organic colorants in fibers, paints, and glazes by surface 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Acc Chem Res 43(6):782–791. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ ar100 019q
Chakraborty I, Banik S, Biswas R, Yamamoto T, Noothalapati 
H, Mazumder N (2023) Raman spectroscopy for microplas-
tic detection in water sources: a systematic review. Int J Envi-
ron Sci Technol 20(9):10435–10448. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s13762- 022- 04505-0
Chang M, Wen Q, Bai T, Liu Y, Huang X, Dai Z, Sun S, Yang Y, Li C 
(2023) Novel efficient method to continuously collect microplas-
tics from seawater via a two-phase system. Environ Sci Technol 
Lett 10(10):924–930. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. estle tt. 3c005 46
Chatterjee S, Krolis E, Molenaar R, Claessens MMAE, Blum C (2023) 
Nile red staining for nanoplastic quantification: overcoming the chal-
lenge of false positive counts due to fluorescent aggregates. Environ 
Chall 13:100744. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envc. 2023. 100744
Cole M, Lindeque P, Fileman E, Halsband C, Goodhead R, Moger 
J, Galloway TS (2013) Microplastic ingestion by zooplankton. 
Environ Sci Technol 47(12):6646–6655. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ 
es400 663f
Cole M, Coppock R, Lindeque PK, Altin D, Reed S, Pond DW, 
Sørensen L, Galloway TS, Booth AM (2019) Effects of nylon 
microplastic on feeding, lipid accumulation, and moulting in 
a coldwater copepod. Environ Sci Technol 53(12):7075–7082. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. est. 9b018 53
Cottom JW, Cook E, Velis CA (2024) A local-to-global emissions 
inventory of macroplastic pollution. Nature 633(8028):101–108. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41586- 024- 07758-6
Covernton GA, Davies HL, Cox KD, El-Sabaawi R, Juanes F, 
Dudas SE, Dower JF (2021) A Bayesian analysis of the factors 
determining microplastics ingestion in fishes. J Hazard Mater 
413:125405. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 2021. 125405
Cowger W, Karapetrova A, Lincoln C, Chamas A, Sherrod H, Leong 
N, Lasdin KS, Knauss C, Teofilović V, Arienzo MM, Steinmetz 
Z, Primpke S, Darjany L, Murphy-Hagan C, Moore S, Moore 
C, Lattin G, Gray A, Kozloski R, Bryksa J, Maurer B (2025) 
Open specy 1.0: automated (hyper)spectroscopy for microplas-
tics. Anal Chem 97(32):17345–17356. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ 
acs. analc hem. 5c009 62
D’ Avignon G, Gregory-Eaves I, Ricciardi A (2022) Microplastics 
in lakes and rivers: an issue of emerging significance to lim-
nology. Environ Rev 30(2):228–244. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1139/ 
er- 2021- 0048
Dalvand M, Hamidian AH (2023) Occurrence and distribution of 
microplastics in wetlands. Sci Total Environ 862:160740. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2022. 160740
Dikareva N, Simon KS (2024) Factors controlling transport dynam -
ics of microplastics in streams. ACS EST Water 4(9):4120–4128. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acses twater. 4c003 93
Ding T, Wei L, Hou Z, Li J, Zhang C, Lin D (2022) Microplastics 
altered contaminant behavior and toxicity in natural waters. J 
Hazard Mater 425:127908. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 
2021. 127908
Dris R, Imhof H, Sanchez W, Gasperi J, Galgani F, Tassin B, Laforsch 
C (2015) Beyond the ocean: contamination of freshwater ecosys-
tems with (micro-)plastic particles. Environ Chem 12(5):539–550. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1071/ EN141 72
Dris R, Gasperi J, Rocher V, Tassin B (2018) Synthetic and non-syn-
thetic anthropogenic fibers in a river under the impact of Paris 
Megacity: sampling methodological aspects and flux estimations. 
Sci Total Environ 618:157–164. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito 
tenv. 2017. 11. 009
Elkhatib D, Oyanedel-Craver V (2020) A critical review of extraction 
and identification methods of microplastics in wastewater and 
drinking water. Environ Sci Technol 54(12):7037–7049. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. est. 9b066 72
Ellison AH, Zisman WA (1954) Wettability studies on nylon, polyeth-
ylene terephthalate and polystyrene. J Phys Chem 58(6):503–506. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ j1505 16a013
Emberson-Marl H, Coppock RL, Cole M, Godley BJ, Mimpriss N, 
Nelms SE, Lindeque PK (2023) Microplastics in the Arctic: a 
transect through the Barents Sea. Front Mar Sci. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 3389/ fmars. 2023. 12418 29
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) (2019) Annex XV restriction 
report: proposal for a restriction – intentionally added microplas-
tics. Version 1, 11 January 2019. European Chemicals Agency, 
Helsinki, Finland.
European Commission (2022) Proposal for a directive of the euro-
pean parliament and of the council amending directive 2000/60/
EC establishing a framework for community action in the field of 
water policy, directive 2006/118/EC on the protection of ground-
water against pollution and deterioration and directive 2008/105/
EC on environmental quality standards in the field of water policy. 
COM(2022) 540 final, 2022/0344(COD), Brussels, Belgium
Felsing S, Kochleus C, Buchinger S, Brennholt N, Stock F, Reifferscheid 
G (2018) A new approach in separating microplastics from envi-
ronmental samples based on their electrostatic behavior. Environ 
Pollut 234:20–28. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envpol. 2017. 11. 013
Galgani F, Lusher AL, Strand J, Haarr ML, Vinci M, Molina Jack E, 
Kagi R, Aliani S, Herzke D, Nikiforov V, Primpke S, Schmidt N, 
Fabres J, De Witte B, Solbakken VS, van Bavel B (2024) Revisit-
ing the strategy for marine litter monitoring within the european 
marine strategy framework directive (MSFD). Ocean Coast Manag 
255:107254. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. oceco aman. 2024. 107254
Gardon T, Reisser C, Soyez C, Quillien V, Le Moullac G (2018) Micro-
plastics affect energy balance and gametogenesis in the pearl oys-
ter Pinctada margaritifera. Environ Sci Technol 52(9):5277–5286. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. est. 8b001 68
Gerigny O, Blanco G, Lips U, Buhhalko N, Chouteau L, Georges E, 
Meyers N, Vanavermaete D, Galgani F, Ourgaud M, Papillon L, 
Sempéré R, De Witte B (2024) Comparative analysis of micro-
plastics detection methods applied to marine sediments: a case 
study in the Bay of Marseille. Mar Pollut Bull 207:116787. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2024. 116787
Geyer R, Jambeck JR, Law KL (2017) Production, use, and fate of 
all plastics ever made. Sci Adv. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1126/ sciadv. 
17007 82
Ghinassi M, Michielotto A, Uguagliati F, Zattin M (2023) Mechanisms 
of microplastics trapping in river sediments: insights from the 
Arno river (Tuscany, Italy). Sci Total Environ 866:161273. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2022. 161273
Grbic J, Nguyen B, Guo E, You JB, Sinton D, Rochman CM (2019) 
Magnetic extraction of microplastics from environmental samples. 
Environ Sci Technol Lett 6(2):68–72. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. 
estle tt. 8b006 71
Guerranti C, Cannas S, Scopetani C, Fastelli P, Cincinelli A, Renzi M 
(2017) Plastic litter in aquatic environments of Maremma Regional 
Park (Tyrrhenian Sea, Italy): contribution by the Ombrone river 
and levels in marine sediments. Mar Pollut Bull 117(1–2):366–
370. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2017. 02. 021
Hermsen E, Mintenig SM, Besseling E, Koelmans AA (2018) Quality 
criteria for the analysis of microplastic in biota samples: a critical 
review. Environ Sci Technol 52(18):10230–10240. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1021/ acs. est. 8b016 11
Hidalgo-Ruz V, Gutow L, Thompson RC, Thiel M (2012) Microplas-
tics in the marine environment: a review of the methods used for 
identification and quantification. Environ Sci Technol 46(6):3060–
3075. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ es203 1505
Huang M, Si C, Qiu C, Wang G (2024) Microplastics analysis: from 
qualitative to quantitative. Environ Sci Adv 3(12):1652–1668. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ D4VA0 0244J
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Idehara W, Haga Y, Tsujino H, Ikuno Y, Manabe S, Hokaku M, Asa-
hara H, Higashisaka K, Tsutsumi Y (2025) Exploring Nile Red 
staining as an analytical tool for surface-oxidized microplastics. 
Environ Res 269:120934. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envres. 2025. 
120934
Jambeck J, Geyer R, Wilcox C, Siegler TR, Perryman M, Andrady 
A, Narayan R, Lavender Law K (2015) Plastic waste inputs from 
land into the ocean. Science 347(6223):768–771. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1126/ scien ce. 12603 52
Jefroy M, Lusher A, van Bavel B, Ghaffari P (2026) Microplastics in 
sediments: a systematic review structured through reproducible 
analytical pipelines. Chemosphere 396:144849. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. chemo sphere. 2026. 144849
Jewett E, Arnott G, Connolly L, Vasudevan N, Kevei E (2022) Micro-
plastics and their impact on reproduction—can we learn from the 
C. elegans model? Front Toxicol. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ ftox. 
2022. 748912
Jiao M, Cao S, Ren L, Li R (2021) Analysis of composite microplastics 
in sediment using 3D Raman spectroscopy and imaging method. 
J Hazard Mater Adv 3:100016. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. hazadv. 
2021. 100016
Julienne F, Delorme N, Lagarde F (2019) From macroplastics to micro-
plastics: role of water in the fragmentation of polyethylene. Che-
mosphere 236:124409. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. chemo sphere. 
2019. 124409
Kedzierski M, Le Tilly V, César G, Sire O, Bruzaud S (2017) Efficient 
microplastics extraction from sand. A cost effective methodology 
based on sodium iodide recycling. Mar Pollut Bull 115(1–2):120–
129. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/J. MARPO LBUL. 2016. 12. 002
Kononov A, Hishida M, Suzuki K, Harada N (2022) Microplastic 
extraction from agricultural soils using canola oil and unsaturated 
sodium chloride solution and evaluation by incineration method. 
Soil Syst 6(2):54. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ soils ystem s6020 054
Kooi M, Koelmans AA (2019) Simplifying microplastic via continuous 
probability distributions for size, shape, and density. Environ Sci Tech-
nol Lett 6(9):551–557. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. estle tt. 9b003 79
Kooi M, Primpke S, Mintenig SM, Lorenz C, Gerdts G, Koelmans 
AA (2021) Characterizing the multidimensionality of microplas-
tics across environmental compartments. Water Res 202:117429. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. watres. 2021. 117429
Kotula AP, Orski SV, Brignac KC, Lynch JM, Heilala BMJ (2022) 
Time-gated Raman spectroscopy of recovered plastics. Mar Pollut 
Bull 181:113894. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2022. 113894
Kumar A, Madan M, Kumar V, Bhattacharya J, Dubey KK (2026) 
Challenges and prospects in the identification of micro and nano 
plastics using Raman spectroscopy: a comprehensive review. 
Front Water. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ frwa. 2026. 17639 16
Lebreton L, Kooi M, Mani T, Mintenig SM, Tekman MB, van Emmerik 
T, Wolter H (2022) Plastics and the ocean : origin, characteriza-
tion, fate, and impacts. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Li Y, Fu J, Peng L, Sun X, Wang G, Wang Y, Chen L (2023) A sustain-
able emulsion for separation and Raman identification of micro-
plastics and nanoplastics. Chem Eng J 469:143992. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. cej. 2023. 143992
Lin C-H, Chang Y-F (2022) Comparison and characterization of pig-
ments and dyes by Raman spectroscopy. Anal Sci 38(3):483–495. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2116/ anals ci. 21SAR 03
Liu F, Vianello A, Vollertsen J (2019) Retention of microplastics in 
sediments of urban and highway stormwater retention ponds. 
Environ Pollut 255:113335. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. envpol. 
2019. 113335
Liu J, Zhang X, Du Z, Luan Z, Li L, Xi S, Wang B, Cao L, Yan J (2020) 
Application of confocal laser Raman spectroscopy on marine sedi-
ment microplastics. J Oceanol Limnol 38(5):1502–1516. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00343- 020- 0129-z
Liu Y, Jiang W-Y, Liao Y, Sun R, Hu J, Lu Z, Chang M, Yang J, Dai Z, 
Zhou C, Hong P, Qian Z-J, Sun S, Ren L, Liang Y-Q, Zhang Y, Li 
C (2022) Separation of false-positive microplastics and analysis 
of microplastics via a two-phase system combined with confocal 
Raman spectroscopy. J Hazard Mater 440:129803. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 2022. 129803
Liu Y, Lin L, Yang B, Huang M, Huang X, Chen X, Dai Z, Sun S, 
Yang Y, Li C (2024) Separation and identification of nanoplastics 
via a two-phase system combined with surface-enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 12(4):1595–1604. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acssu schem eng. 3c068 91
Mancini M, Soler M, Colomer J, Solari L, Serra T (2025) Synthetic 
microfibers driven by turbidity currents: transition from smooth 
bed to macro-roughness. Mar Pollut Bull 221:118509. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2025. 118509
Miller ME, Kroon FJ, Motti CA (2017) Recovering microplastics from 
marine samples: a review of current practices. Mar Pollut Bull 
123(1–2):6–18. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. marpo lbul. 2017. 08. 058
Monnanni A, Rimondi V, Morelli G, Nannoni A, Cincinelli A, Mar -
tellini T, Chelazzi D, Laurati M, Sforzi L, Ciani F, Lattanzi P, 
Costagliola P (2024) Microplastics and microfibers contamina-
tion in the Arno River (Central Italy): impact from urban areas 
and contribution to the Mediterranean Sea. Sci Total Environ 
955:177113. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2024. 177113
Naiman RJ, Décamps H (1997) The ecology of interfaces: riparian 
zones. Annu Rev Ecol Syst 28(1):621–658. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1146/ annur ev. ecols ys. 28.1. 621
Nava V, Leoni B (2021) A critical review of interactions between 
microplastics, microalgae and aquatic ecosystem function. Water 
Res 188:116476. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. watres. 2020. 116476
Nikhil VG, Amritha GG, Ranjeet K, Varghese GK (2024) Distribution 
of microplastics in seafloor sediments and their differential assimi-
lation in nearshore benthic molluscs along the south-west coast 
of India. Environ Pollut 344:123350. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
envpol. 2024. 123350
Okoye CO, Addey CI, Oderinde O, Okoro JO, Uwamungu JY, Ike-
chukwu CK, Okeke ES, Ejeromedoghene O, Odii EC (2022) 
Toxic chemicals and persistent organic pollutants associated with 
micro-and nanoplastics pollution. Chem Eng J Adv 11:100310. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ceja. 2022. 100310
Peruzzi C, Castaldi M, Francalanci S, Solari L (2019) Three‐ dimen-
sional hydraulic characterisation of the Arno River in Florence. J 
Flood Risk Manag. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ jfr3. 12490
Pita F, Castilho A (2020) Separation of PET from other plastics 
by flotation combined with alkaline pretreatment. Polímeros 
30(3):e2020026. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1590/ 0104- 1428. 03320
Plastics Europe (2022) Plastics – the facts 2022: an analysis of euro-
pean plastics production, demand, conversion and end-of-life 
management. Plastics Europe, Brussels, Belgium
Prasad S, Bennett A, Triantafyllou M (2024) Characterization of Nile 
Red-stained microplastics through fluorescence spectroscopy. J 
Mar Sci Eng 12(8):1403. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ jmse1 20814 03
Prat D, Wells A, Hayler J, Sneddon H, McElroy CR, Abou-Shehada S, 
Dunn PJ (2016) CHEM21 selection guide of classical- and less 
classical-solvents. Green Chem 18(1):288–296. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1039/ C5GC0 1008J
Qin Y, Song F, Ai Z, Zhang P, Zhang L (2015) Protocatechuic acid 
promoted alachlor degradation in Fe(III)/H 2O2 fenton system. 
Environ Sci Technol 49(13):7948–7956. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ 
es506 110w
Rambacher J, Pantos O, Hardwick S, Cameron EZ, Gaw S (2023) 
Transforming encounters: a review of the drivers and mechanisms 
of macrofaunal plastic fragmentation in the environment. Camb 
Prisms Plast 1:1–33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1017/ plc. 2023.6
Rimondi V, Monnanni A, De Beni E, Bicocchi G, Chelazzi D, Cin-
cinelli A, Fratini S, Martellini T, Morelli G, Venturi S, Lattanzi 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
P, Costagliola P (2022) Occurrence and quantification of natural 
and microplastic items in urban streams: the case of Mugnone 
Creek (Florence, Italy). Toxics 10(4):159. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
toxic s1004 0159
Rodrigues MO, Gonçalves AMM, Gonçalves FJM, Abrantes N (2020) 
Improving cost-efficiency for MPs density separation by zinc 
chloride reuse. MethodsX 7:100785. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
mex. 2020. 100785
Rohais S, Armitage JJ, Romero-Sarmiento M-F, Pierson J-L, Teles V, 
Bauer D, Cassar C, Sebag D, Klopffer M-H, Pelerin M (2024) 
A source-to-sink perspective of an anthropogenic marker: a first 
assessment of microplastics concentration, pathways, and accu-
mulation across the environment. Earth Sci Rev 254:104822. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. earsc irev. 2024. 104822
Rossi M, Vergara A, Capozzi F, Giordano S, Spagnuolo V, Troisi R, 
Vedi V, Ambrosi de Magistris F, Fiaschini N, Tommasi T, Guida 
M, D’ Aniello M, Donadio C (2024) A new green protocol for 
the identification of microplastics and microfibers in marine sedi-
ments, a case study from the Vesuvian Coast, Southern Italy. J 
Hazard Mater 477:135272. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 
2024. 135272
Ruggero F, Gori R, Lubello C (2020) Methodologies for microplas-
tics recovery and identification in heterogeneous solid matrices: 
a review. J Polym Environ 28(3):739–748. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s10924- 019- 01644-3
Sancataldo G, Avellone G, Vetri V (2020) Nile River red lifetime 
reveals microplastic identity. Environ Sci Process Impacts 
22(11):2266–2275. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ D0EM0 0348D
Schmidt C, Krauth T, Wagner S (2017a) Correction to export of plastic 
debris by rivers into the sea. Environ Sci Technol 51(21):12246–
12253. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. est. 7b023 68
Schmidt C, Krauth T, Wagner S (2017b) Export of plastic debris by riv-
ers into the sea. Environ Sci Technol 51(21):12246–12253. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. est. 7b023 68
Scopetani C, Chelazzi D, Mikola J, Leiniö V, Heikkinen R, Cincinelli 
A, Pellinen J (2020) Olive oil-based method for the extraction, 
quantification and identification of microplastics in soil and com-
post samples. Sci Total Environ 733:139338. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. scito tenv. 2020. 139338
Simon-Sánchez L, Vianello A, Kirstein IV, Molazadeh M-S, Lorenz 
C, Vollertsen J (2024) Assessment of microplastic pollution and 
polymer risk in the sediment compartment of the Limfjord, Den-
mark. Sci Total Environ 950:175017. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
scito tenv. 2024. 175017
Stanton T, Johnson M, Nathanail P, Gomes RL, Needham T, Bur -
son A (2019) Exploring the efficacy of Nile Red in microplastic 
quantification: a costaining approach. Environ Sci Technol Lett 
6(10):606–611. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. estle tt. 9b004 99
Stride B, Abolfathi S, Bending GD, Pearson J (2024) Quantifying 
microplastic dispersion due to density effects. J Hazard Mater 
466:133440. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 2024. 133440
Thompson RC, Olsen Y, Mitchell RP, Davis A, Rowland SJ, John 
AWG, McGonigle D, Russell AE (2004) Lost at sea: where is all 
the plastic? Science (1979) 304(5672):838–838. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1126/ scien ce. 10945 59
Thompson RC, Swan SH, Moore CJ, vom Saal FS (2009) Our plastic 
age. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 364(1526):1973–1976. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1098/ rstb. 2009. 0054
Tumwesigye E, Felicitas Nnadozie C, C Akamagwuna F, Siwe 
Noundou X, William Nyakairu G, Odume ON (2023) Microplas-
tics as vectors of chemical contaminants and biological agents in 
freshwater ecosystems: current knowledge status and future per -
spectives. Environ Pollut 330:121829. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
envpol. 2023. 121829
Vannote RL, Minshall GW, Cummins KW, Sedell JR, Cushing CE 
(1980) The river continuum concept. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 
37(1):130–137. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1139/ f80- 017
Vianello A, Da Ros L, Boldrin A, Marceta T, Moschino V (2018) First 
evaluation of floating microplastics in the Northwestern Adriatic 
Sea. Environ Sci Pollut Res 25(28):28546–28561. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s11356- 018- 2812-6
Villa B, Bolla G, Gambino I, Terzaghi E, Boldrocchi G, Baldini 
E, Brusa F, Federici S, Ducoli S, Bergna G, Zoccali A, Mal-
pei F, Di Guardo A, Bettinetti R (2025) Co-staining micro-
plastics with Nile Red and Rose Bengal for improved optical 
quantification. Sci Rep 16(1):2917. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ 
s41598- 025- 32829-7
Weber CJ, Lechthaler S (2021) Plastics as a stratigraphic marker in flu-
vial deposits. Anthropocene 36:100314. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ancene. 2021. 100314
Witzig CS, Földi C, Wörle K, Habermehl P, Pittroff M, Müller 
YK, Lauschke T, Fiener P, Dierkes G, Freier KP, Zumbülte N 
(2020) When good intentions go bad—false positive micro-
plastic detection caused by disposable gloves. Environ Sci 
Technol 54(19):12164–12172. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acs. 
est. 0c037 42
Xu J, Zuo R, Wu G, Liu J, Liu J, Huang C, Wang Z (2024) Global 
distribution, drivers, and potential hazards of microplastics in 
groundwater: a review. Sci Total Environ 954:176194. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2024. 176194
Xue Q, Yu G, Lu F, Dong Y (2024) Fluorescent labelling combined 
with confocal differential Raman spectroscopy to detect micro-
plastics in seawater. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc 
320:124591. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. saa. 2024. 124591
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.