176
INTRODUCTION
The Batik industry has an impact in the form 
of organic liquid waste with a large volume, 
thick colour, pungent smell and high tempera -
ture, acidity (pH), Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), To-
tal Suspended Solid (TSS) (Sirait, 2018). This 
industry also generated high dissolved oxygen 
(DO) that impacted organisms dead and disrupt 
the ecosystem balances i.e. microbial degrada -
tion (Muchtasjar et al., 2019). This condition is 
caused by usingsynthetic and or chemical dyes 
in the batik production process (Rashid et al., 
2013). If wastewater is discharged into envi -
ronmental media without being treated first, it 
can cause environmental pollution, especially in 
aquatic ecosystems (Setyaningtyas et al., 2019). 
In addition, organic waste can increase nitrogen 
levels into nitrate compounds which cause bad 
odors. Liquid waste from the textile dyeing pro -
cess significantly impacts environmental pollu -
tion. The textile dyeing process with synthetic 
dyes is easier to process and makes the colors 
brighter and more mature, but at certain lev -
els are toxic and carcinogenic (cancer triggers) 
(Dwisandi et al., 2021).
Environmental pollution caused by liquid 
waste from the Batik industry in Ulu Gedong 
Village, DanauTeluk District, Jambi City. From 
the results of field monitoring and data on batik 
production in Ulu Gedong Village, DanauTe -
luk District, ten Batik industries spread across 
ninelocationsare actively producing Jambi Batik 
Strategy for Liquid Waste Management for Batik Industry 
in Ulu Gedong Village, Jambi, Indonesia
Anis Tatik Maryani1*, Sari Dewi1, Hutwan Syarifuddin1, Yudha Gusti Wibowo2
1 Environmental Science Master Study Program, Jambi University, Jambi City, Indonesia
2 Department of Mining Engineering, Institut Teknologi Sumatera, Lampung, Indonesia
* Corresponding author’s email: anis_tatik@yahoo.com
ABSTRACT
Batik industry liquid waste in Ulu Gedong Village, Danau Teluk District, Jambi City,mu st be managed so it 
doesn’t pollute the su rrounding environment. Many factors influence the need for properly treated batik liquid 
waste. Thus, it is necessary to know what factors cause pollution and th e right strateg y for managin g Batik 
industry wastewater in Ulu Ged ong Village, DanauTeluk District, Jambi City . The aims of this study were (1) 
to analyze aspects that influence the liquid waste manag ement strategy for Batik industries in Ulu Gedo ng Vil-
lage, DanauTeluk District, Jambi City, (2) to determin e the appropriate strategy for managing Batik industry 
wastewater in Ulu Gedong Villag e, DanauTeluk District, Jambi City.The number of r espondents in th is study 
consisted of 20 people using th e Analytic Networ k Process method and using the “Super Decision” software. 
The results showed that the most influential aspects in the management of Batik industry liquid waste in Ulu 
Gedong Village, DanauTeluk District, namely Cultural aspects (0.92), Economic (0.8 0), Social (0.45), Manage-
ment (0.42), and Technical (0.41). The main prio rity in the Batik in dustry liquid waste management strategy is 
providing conven ience and incen tives to busin esses participatin g in wastewater management, such as granting 
business licenses and tax breaks. So it is hoped that the role of the Jambi City gover nment can strive to provide 
convenience and incentive assistance to batik entrepr eneurs who have or want to b uild batik Wastewater Man-
agement Installation facilities.
Keywords:waste management. Environmental pollution, batik waste, wastewater, water pollution.
Received: 2023.01.22
Accepted: 2023.01.30
Published: 2023.02.25
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
https://doi.org/10.12912/27197050/160067
ISSN 2719-7050, License CC-BY 4.0
ECOLOGICAL ENGINEERING 
& ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
177
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
using traditional techniques. The ten productive 
craftsmen who produce batik products, on aver -
age, it ranges from 250 to 3,000 pieces of cloth 
per month (Dinas Perindustrian dan Perdagangan 
Provinsi Jambi, 2015). Strengthening allegations 
related to the contamination of Batik industry 
liquid waste, from the results of monitoring the 
liquid waste quality standards carried out by the 
Jambi City Environment Service in 2019, there 
were still several Batik industry whose liquid 
waste quality standards needed to be revised. 
The two samples of Batik industryexamined 
the following was found for “Bahri” batik crafts -
men, the value of fatty oil is 3.8, where this value 
is above the quality standard of 3.0. From the in -
dicator value of liquid waste on the “Dua Putri” 
batik craftsmen, it was found that the value was 
more than the quality standard value, aTSS value 
of 462 was found, far above the quality standard, 
which was only 50. For a pH value of 2.3 (nor -
mal pH between 6.0-9.0). The BOD value is 472, 
above the quality standard of 60. The CODvalue 
is 688.1, above the quality standard of 150. For a 
fatty oil value of 6.6, this value is above the qual-
ity standard of 3,0.
Although several methods were tested to 
manage the waste from the Batik industry, but 
there is no one strategy was successful. Several 
studies are limited on treating Batik wastewater 
using several methods such as adsorption, phy -
toremediation, bioremediation, and filtration. But 
the study about strategy of several aspect still 
rare. Thus, this paper will describe the powerful 
strategy to manage the waste from Batik industry 
in Jambi, Indonesia. This study is very important 
due to successfully reduce and managing waste 
in this location. In this paper, holistic aspect was 
described well including technical aspect, social 
aspect, management aspect, and cultural aspect.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This study was conducted in Ulu Gedong 
District, Jambi City, Jambi Province, Indonesia 
during October to November 2022. The question-
naires used as a tool to get the information from 
the legal government, batik entrepreneurs and 
community leaders related to the management of 
batik wastewater from batik industries. Analyti -
cal Network Process was used as a method in this 
study. The result was analyzed by Super Decision 
3.2 software.
RESULTS
Technical Aspect
Technical aspects analyzed including site 
technical conditions, pollution loads, WWTP 
systems and technology. Based on the condition 
of the location of the Batik industry in Ulu Ge -
dong Village, the appropriate wastewater treat -
ment system is centralized offsite wastewater 
treatment. Technically, each business distributes 
wastewater through a closed pipe network to a 
centralized communal WWTP in a representative 
area. To determine the system and technology of 
wastewater treatment for the Batik industry, data 
regarding land conditions, quality and quantity of 
wastewater produced is required. Because of this, 
a wastewater treatment system and technology 
are needed to reduce the levels of these pollutant 
substances to meet the established environmental 
quality standards.
Based on questionnaires and interviews con -
ducted with 20 respondents, it can be concluded 
that they do not yet have sufficient knowledge, 
expertise, and financial ability to provide waste -
water treatment, so that suitable wastewater treat-
ment is one that has easy technology and low op-
erational and maintenance costs. Each technology 
has advantages and disadvantages related to fund-
ing variables, wastewater quality and land area. 
Optimization of these three variables is needed 
in accordance with technical, economic and so -
cial conditions to realize good processing perfor-
mance and continue the sustainability of Batik 
industrywastewater management.
Many technologies for treating Batik industry 
wastewater can be used to reduce pollutant lev -
els according to predetermined quality standards, 
namely color, temperature, pH, BOD, COD, TSS, 
total phenol, total ammonia, oil-fat and total 
chromium both physically, chemistry and biol -
ogy. Physical and chemical processes are more 
expensive and produce more sludge than biologi-
cal processes.
In one of the Batik industries in Ulu Gedong 
Village, the Batik industry "Zhorif" has built a 
batik wastewater treatment facility through as -
sistance from the Ministry of Industry and Trade 
in collaboration with PT. Nusantara International 
Agency (Banana & Partners). Based on the situ -
ation in the field, these partner companies prefer 
chemical techniques in batik wastewater treat -
ment due to geographical location considerations 
178
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
and the household's lack of electrical power. De -
tail engineering design of wastewater treatment 
plant (WWTP) from the Batik industry in Ulu 
Gedong, Jambi could be seen in Figure 1.
Based on the picture, it can be explained the 
process of wastewater treatment for the "zhorif" 
Batik industry, namely as follows:
1. Equalization Tub: The initial waste storage area
2. Coagulation Tub: Quick-stirring coagulant res-
ervoir (PAC/alum).
3. Flocculation bath: Place for adding flocculants 
(anionic/cationic polymer), slow stirring, place 
for settling.
4. Control Tank: Storage of wastewater after it 
has been settled (only water) before filtration 
(after this the water is filtered and can be re -
used for production)
5. Sludge Drying Bed: Place for storing and dry -
ing sludge after settling (residual from process 
tanks 2 and 3)
For mixing chemicals in the liquid waste 
treatment tub of the "zhorif" Batik industry, they 
are as follows:
1. Make each solution first, namely:
a) DACs;
b) PAC (Poly Aluminum Chloride) is a solid 
substance in the form of alum;
c) Anionic Polymers as Flocculants.
2. Do a waste dosage test, by adding the solution 
with the rule of looking for a pH close to 7. Do 
not let the pH be below 7.
3. Then put the DAC and PAC solutions into the 
second tub (coagulation tub) and stir.
4. Add polymer solution to the third tub.
5. Wait for the waste to precipitate.
6. Remove the precipitate.
7. Wastewater becomes clean
From the results of the wastewater treatment of 
the "zhorif" Batik industry, it was tested regarding 
the waste quality standards on November 6, 2022 
according to Figure 2 and Table 1. Based on the test 
results on the 6 samples of wastewater, there ap -
pears to be a decrease in the level of waste according 
to the treatment. In the wastewater sample number 
3, after the processing was carried out, it was found 
that the wastewater quality standard values were all 
below standard, in the sense that it complied with 
the waste quality standards, with the conclusion that 
the wastewater treatment of the "zhorif" Batik in-
dustry was successful and feasible. to be continued 
and can be applied to other Batik industry.
The advantage of this technique is that it can 
be done quickly, but still requires a large amount 
of money. Compared to the phytoremediation 
technique, this technique does not require much 
money, but requires a longer processing time.
Figure 1. Plan of the “Zhorif” batik waste processing building
179
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
In accordance with Suharto et al (2016), who 
found that the process of treating batik wastewater 
using the phytoremediation method with water hya-
cinth plants was proven to reduce levels of BOD, 
COD, and TSS. The best treatment based on the 
amount of water hyacinth and the length of exposure 
time for batik waste was most effective for BOD, 
COD and TSS content in the same treatment, which 
was 12 days of exposure with 7 water hyacinths.
Economic aspect
Economic aspects include regional economic 
conditions, investment costs, operation and main-
tenance of WWTPs and private CSR programs. 
Processing and trading industry activities by 
MSMEs support the economy in Ulu Gedong Vil-
lage. In accordance with the concept of good cor-
porate governance, which places the private sector 
as a component of good governance, its existence 
is expected to contribute to development activities. 
The private sector or large companies, in accor -
dance with RI Law Number 40 of 2007 concerning 
Limited Liability Companies, which is clarified by 
Government Regulation Number 47 of 2012 con-
cerning the Social and Environmental Responsibil-
ity of Limited Liability Companies, have an obli-
gation to carry out Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) programs or social responsibility and the 
environment in the surrounding area.
CSR activities can be carried out in the eco -
nomic, sociocultural, health and environmental 
fields. There are eight indicators in measuring 
CSR performance: leadership, the proportion of 
assistance, transparency and accountability, area 
coverage, planning and monitoring, and evalua -
tion, stakeholder engagement, sustainability, and 
tangible results (outcomes).
Figure 2. “Zhorif” batik industrywastewater (Source: Banana & Partner)
Table 1. Liquid waste test results for “Zhorif” batik industry
No. Parameter
Results
Units Threshold
AL-4 AL-1 AL-2 AL-5 AL-3
I Physycs
1 Total Suspendid Solids (TSS) 3,940.00 986.67 415.00 18.00 12.50 mg/L 50
2 Colour 89,705.28 39,859.55 321.90 192.50 64.18 Pt Co
II Chemical
1 Total Chromium (Cr) <0.0887 <0.0887 <0.0887 <0.0887 <0.0887 mg/L 1.0
2 Ammonia (NH3-N) 12.88 11.26 8.33 3.80 5.86 mg/L 10
3 Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD) 4,836.22 2,296.14 425.21 51.19 33.92 mg/L 60
4 Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 14,674.36 7,586.66 1,466.03 159.02 126.75 mg/L 150
5 Oil and grease 161.17 79.95 28.50 2.37 <1.94 mg/L 3.0
Note: declared to have passed the test if the value is below the quality standard (source: Banana & Partner).
180
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
Based on the results of observations and in -
terviews, it is known that the CSR program could 
be more optimal according to the standard criteria 
for CSR programs and existing regulations. There 
needs to be planning and implementation of CSR 
programs in managingBatik industrywastewater 
in the Ulu Gedong Village. The weakness in deal-
ing with the problem of batik waste is the lack 
of a budget from the government, the lack of a 
number of employees so that additional new em -
ployees are needed, the capacity of the WWTP 
that is owned has not been able to meet all of the 
total waste produced.
Management aspect
Management aspects include regulations, 
government policies and programs, government 
institutions and business institutions. Government 
regulations and policies from the central, provin -
cial and district levels related to the management 
of Batik industry waste water are outlined in the 
form of laws, government regulations, ministerial 
decrees, regional regulations and regional head 
decisions, which are substantially based on vari -
ous central regulations for each preamble and the 
contents in the articles on authority have values 
based on that the environmental policy paradigm 
must become the mainstream of policy at the cen-
tral, provincial and district/city government levels.
Government regulations at the central level 
related to environmental policies form the basis 
for preparing regulations and policies at the lo -
cal government level at the Jambi Province and 
Jambi City levels.Based on a study of regulations, 
policies, and programs in Jambi City, it can be 
concluded that there is no wastewater manage -
ment planning program for Batik industry in Ulu 
Gedong Village. The government has a strate -
gic role in managing Batik industry wastewater 
through related agencies.
Social aspect
Social aspects include perceptions, attitudes, 
and willingness to participate in the Batik indus -
try. The social condition of Batik industry in Ulu 
Gedong Village plays an important role in plan -
ning the empowerment of Batik industry in op -
timal and sustainable wastewater management. 
The socio-cultural approach is an important part 
of understanding the characteristics of people's 
lives, especially the Batik industry community in 
Ulu Gedong Village. Conducive social conditions 
constitute good social governance as a very im -
portant component of good governance.
Based on the questionnaire given to 10 Ba -
tik industry respondents in Ulu Gedong Village, 
it can be seen that the respondents have the per -
ception that batik wastewater will pollute the en -
vironment and it is necessary to have it treated 
before being discharged into the environment, 
but they need outside assistance, both govern -
ment and private, in the form of programs physi -
cal and non-physical. The physical program is the 
development of communal WWTP infrastructure 
and facilities, while the non-physical program is 
in the form of coaching to increase knowledge, 
expertise and organizational organization of Ba -
tik industry institutions.
Cultural aspect
Almost all villages across Jambi have batik 
workshops owned by artisans. Various reasons for 
engaging in batik activities are due to geographi -
cal conditions that do not support the agricultural 
sector, parts of the area are swamps that are prone 
to flooding resulting in residents not being able 
to rely on the agricultural sector to make ends 
meet. Therefore, non-agricultural activities are 
an alternative for survival to increase household 
economic income. One of them is to pursue the 
craft sector both as the main and side livelihood.
Another reason is that it is supported by the 
expertise and skills that have long been owned, 
especially by women, such as sewing and weav -
ing. They have even been artisans of woven ikat, 
the Jambi Malay typical clothing worn by Jambi 
sultans for a long time. Then it lies in the ease 
of painting the motifs, namely the ceplok motif 
which is faster, easier, and simpler to make com-
pared to the sequential and more complicated 
Javanese batik motifs. Another convenience lies 
in the relative availability of raw materials and 
natural dyes for batik in the environment around 
the craftsmen's residence
In addition, the development of the Batik in -
dustry cannot be separated from the government's 
role in encouraging the development of Batik in -
dustry, as well as increasing interest in wearing 
batik. One of them is by requiring civil servants to 
wear Jambi batik as uniforms on certain days dur-
ing working hours. The increase in batik produc -
tion has not become a concern for batik craftsmen 
so that the liquid waste produced is disposed of 
181
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
directly into the environment without being pro -
cessed first. This behavior eventually becomes a 
culture in society.
Criteria score
The score results of the sub-criteria compared 
to the criteria are depicted in Figure 3. Based on 
the data, the community's assumption score on 
cultural aspects is higher than the others with a 
score of 0.92. This is because batik is considered 
as one of the ancestral heritage. Where batik is 
an artistic heritage that continues to be preserved 
with the increasing number of Batik industry that 
have been established, both the MSME scale 
and some even large businesses.The research 
results show that the economic aspect is not re -
lated to the community participation factor but 
rather to the community's cultural values.This 
result also shows that the technical aspect has 
the lowest score, namely 0.41, which indicates 
that the technical aspect is not a criterion that is 
considered important in choosing batik wastewa-
ter management efforts. These results reported 
the same resultwith previous studiedin Depok, 
Indonesia with title Selection of Alternative Do -
mestic Liquid Waste Treatment Using the Depen-
dence and Driving Power (DDPA) Method and 
Analytic Network Process (ANP) (Case Study: 
Depok City)(Adzillah et al., 2016). The results 
show that technical criteria and sub-criteria are 
considered insignificant. Respondents focused 
more on economic, social, environmental, and 
institutional issues.
Subcriteria score
The results of sub-criteria scores that are 
close to suitability are depicted in Figure 4. The 
data shows, that the community's assumption 
Figure 3. Criteria score value
Figure 4. Sub criteria score of value
182
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
score for the reward and sanction sub-category is 
higher than the others, with a score of 2.03. This 
result illustrates that respondents think that so far, 
there has yet to be any real action from the gov -
ernment regarding how to reward entrepreneurs 
who follow the rules and also apply sanctions to 
batik entrepreneurs who do not follow the rules in 
managing their batik liquid waste.This is in line 
which explains that in the strategy for handling 
batik waste, there are strategic program efforts 
that can be carried out, including promote thelocal 
regulationwhich will later be followed by impos-
ing sanctions on entrepreneurs who do not follow 
regulatory rules (Mahfudloh & Lestari, 2017).
Alternative score
The results of alternative scores that are close 
to suitability are depicted in Figure 5. Tt was 
found that almost all respondents agreed that the 
appropriate alternative was incentives and grant -
ing of permits with a score of 1.25. So, it can be 
concluded that the strategic priority in managing-
Batik industry wastewater in Ulu Gedong Village, 
DanauTeluk District, Jambi City is to provide 
convenience and incentives to businesses partici-
pating in wastewater management such as grant -
ing business licenses and tax breaks.Provision 
of facilities and incentives can be in the form of 
providing government assistance, such as fund -
ing assistance for the construction of a Wastewa-
ter Management Installation facility (WWTP), or 
other facilities, such as assistance for permits and 
providing tax relief for Batik industry that have 
made a batik WWTP facility.
These results are in line with previous study 
which states that the formulation of strategies and 
strategic program efforts that can be made by the 
Pekalongan City Environmental Agency in the 
implementation of handling batik industrial waste 
in Pekalongan City so that it is better in the fu -
ture: optimizing APBD from the government to 
manage hazardous batik waste due to synthetic 
dyes in the form of utilizing the APBD from the 
government to increase the capacity of WWTPs 
(Mahfudloh & Lestari, 2017).
Meanwhile, the lowest alternative value is 
disseminating laws and regulations related to 
implementing wastewater management and en -
forcing sanctions, with a score of 0.63. These re -
sults are in line with previous study that reported 
aboutwastewater treatment for Batik industry in 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia (Indrayani, 2018). Stra -
tegic efforts can be carried out through various 
integrated approaches, both regulatory and policy 
approaches, as well as outreach and assistance to 
stakeholders.
CONCLUSIONS
The most influential aspects in the manage -
ment of Batik industry wastewater in Ulu Gedong 
Village, DanauTeluk District, namely Culture 
(0.92), Economy (0.8), Social (0.45), Manage -
ment (0.42), and Technical (0.41). These results 
Figure 5. Alternative of score value
183
Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology 2023, 24(3), 176–183
indicate community cultural values are more 
dominant than economic and other aspects. Even 
technical aspects are not the most important in 
managingBatik industry wastewater in the Ulu 
Gedong Village, DanauTeluk District.The priority 
of the main Batik industry liquid waste manage -
ment strategy is providing convenience and in -
centives to businesses participating in wastewater 
management, such as granting business licenses 
and tax breaks. These results indicate that strate -
gic efforts can be made, namely the provision of 
government assistance such as funding assistance 
for the construction of a WWTP or other facili -
ties such as assistance with ease of permits and 
providing tax relief for Batik industry that have 
made a WWTP.
REFERENCES
1. Adzillah, W.N., Sembiring, E., & Handajani, M. 
(2016). Pemilihan Alternatif Pengolahan Limbah 
Cair Domestik Dengan Menggunakan Metode De-
pendence and Driving Power (Ddpa) Dan Analytic 
Network Process (Anp) (Studi Kasus: Kota Depok). 
Jurnal Teknik Lingkungan, 22(2), 82–91. https://
doi.org/10.5614/j.tl.2016.22.2.9
2. Dinas Perindustrian dan Perdagangan Provinsi Jam-
bi. (2015). Rencana Strategis Dinas Perindustrian 
dan Perdagangan Provinsi Jambi.
3. Dwisandi, R.F., Mutiara, F., Nurfauziah, E., & 
Meylani, V . (2021). effectiveness of indigenous 
local microorganisms in degrading hexavalent 
chromium (Cr(VI)) in Batik liquid waste. Biologi -
cal Environment and Pollution, 1(1), 19–29. https://
doi.org/10.31763/bioenvipo.v1i1.383
4. Indrayani, L. (2018). Pengolahan Limbah Cair In -
dustri Batik Sebagai Salah Satu Percontohan Ipal 
Batik Di Yogyakarta. ECOTROPHIC : Jurnal Ilmu 
Lingkungan (Journal of Environmental Science), 
12(2), 173. https://doi.org/10.24843/ejes.2018.v12.
i02.p07
5. Mahfudloh, & Lestari, H. (2017). Strategi Penanga-
nan Industri Batik di Kota Pekalongan. Journal Of 
Public Policy And Management, 6(3), 1–15.
6. Muchtasjar, B., Hadiyanto, H., & Izzati, M. (2019). 
Microbial degradation of batik waste water treat -
ment in Indonesia. IOP Conference Series: Earth 
and Environmental Science, 314(1). https://doi.
org/10.1088/1755-1315/314/1/012020
7. Rashid, H.R., Sulaiman, N.M.N., Hashim, N.A., 
& Hassan, C.R.C. (2013). Synthetic batik waste -
water pretreatment progress by using physical 
treatment. Advanced Materials Research, 627, 
394–398. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.
net/AMR.627.394
8. Setyaningtyas, T., Riyani, K., Handayani, S.N., 
& Firdharini, C. (2019). Degradation of Congo 
Red in batik wastewater using fenton reagent un -
der visible rays. IOP Conference Series: Materials 
Science and Engineering, 509(1), 0–7. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1757-899X/509/1/012027
9. Sirait, M. (2018). Cleaner production options for 
reducing industrial waste: The case of batik indus-
try in Malang, East Java-Indonesia. IOP Conference 
Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 106(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/106/1/012069