Understanding persistent groundwater degradation in coastal communities through a participatory socio-hydrological framework | Discover Sustainability | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Sustainability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Understanding persistent groundwater degradation in coastal communities through a participatory socio-hydrological framework 
 
 
 Case Study 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 19 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Sustainability 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Understanding persistent groundwater degradation in coastal communities through a participatory socio-hydrological framework
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arathi M. Nair 1 , Abhilash M. K. Anand 2 , Draupathy Balakrishnan 1 , Deepa Indira Nair 3 & … Geena Prasad  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-7461-0934 2   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 41 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Groundwater is the lifeline for coastal rural communities in southern India, but it faces severe threats from complex interactions among hydrogeological processes, human behaviour and governance responses. This study adopts a socio-hydrological perspective to diagnose groundwater vulnerability in a coastal aquifer system along the Southwest coast of India. An integrated framework combining Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA), Causal Loop Diagram (CLD), and the Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-Response (DPSIR) model was employed to translate community knowledge into explicit system-level understanding. PRA captured long-term community memory of groundwater change and was transformed into a causal representation of groundwater dynamics, enabling identification of dominant feedback mechanisms. Seasonal groundwater monitoring was used to contextualize community perception with hydrochemical parameters. Results reveal that persistent groundwater degradation is primarily driven by reinforcing feedbacks linking population, groundwater extraction, saline intrusion, and declining water quality. Even though shallow freshwater prevails seasonally, these feedbacks lock the system into a trajectory of increasing dependence on groundwater. The DPSIR synthesis highlights a temporal mismatch between rapidly evolving socio- hydrological pressures and slower institutional responses. This study demonstrates that operationalizing community-driven system knowledge can help in identifying social-ecological feedbacks governing groundwater degradation that are not captured through monitoring-based assessments alone. The proposed participatory socio-hydrological framework offers a potentially applicable approach for diagnosing groundwater stress and identifying leverage points for sustainable groundwater governance, thereby supporting water security, climate resilience, and broader sustainable development objectives in data-limited coastal regions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participatory groundwater management in peri-urban areas with informal water markets: Insights from a socio-hydrogeological case study in Jaipur, India
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 02 July 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Situating socio-hydrogeology: Towards a transdisciplinary understanding of groundwater monitoring practices in western India
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 21 April 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Data-Driven Groundwater Flow Modelling Using Advanced Technologies for Sustainable Aquifer Management
 
 
 
 Chapter 
 
 © 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Earth System Sciences 
 
 
 
 Social Work and Community Development 
 
 
 
 Water Policy 
 
 
 
 Geotechnical Engineering and Applied Earth Sciences 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeology 
 
 
 
 Drought 
 
 
 
 Groundwater Governance and Resource Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements “The authors express their immense gratitude to Sri. Mata Amritanandamayi Devi (Amma), Chancellor of Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, has inspired them to perform selfless service to society. This project has been funded by the E4LIFE International Ph.D. Fellowship Program offered by Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham. We extend our gratitude to the Amrita Live-in-Labs ® academic program and SEER Lab for providing all the support.” Funding Open access funding provided by Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham. This research received no external funding. Author information Authors and Affiliations Amrita School for Sustainable Futures, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri, Kochi, India Arathi M. Nair & Draupathy Balakrishnan Department of Mechanical Engineering, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri, Kochi, India Abhilash M. K. Anand & Geena Prasad Department of Engineering Technologies, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, VIC, 3122, Australia Deepa Indira Nair Authors Arathi M. Nair View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Abhilash M. K. Anand View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Draupathy Balakrishnan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Deepa Indira Nair View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Geena Prasad View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Geena Prasad . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 This study received full ethical approval from the Institutional Human Ethics Committee (IHEC), Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Amritapuri Campus (Ref. No.: IHEC/2024/03/24; dated July 15, 2024). The research was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles outlined in the Belmont Report and in compliance with the guidelines of the approving ethics committee. Informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to data collection. Participation was voluntary, and respondents were assured of anonymity and confidentiality. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Nair, A.M., Anand, A.M.K., Balakrishnan, D. et al. Understanding persistent groundwater degradation in coastal communities through a participatory socio-hydrological framework.
 Discov Sustain (2026). https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-026-04631-6 Download citation Received : 05 February 2026 Accepted : 02 September 2026 Published : 19 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-026-04631-6 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Participatory rural appraisal DPSIR Community-based approach Socio-hydrology Causal loop diagram 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Geena Prasad 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature