Eutrophication effects on fatty acid profiles of seston and omnivorous fish in tropical reservoirs 
 
 
 
 
 Pular para o conteúdo principal
 Comunidades & Coleções Tudo no Repositório Estatísticas Português do Brasil English Español Entrar Entrar pela Central de Acessos Entrar com o ORCID Início Produção acadêmica e científica _Coleta_ Artigos Eutrophication effects on fatty acid profiles of seston and omnivorous fish in tropical reservoirs Eutrophication effects on fatty acid profiles of seston and omnivorous fish in tropical reservoirs Carregando... Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146649 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146649 Data 2021-08-10 Autores Dal'Olio Gomes, Aline Gomes, Fernando Ribeiro Gücker, Björn Tolussi, Carlos Eduardo Figueredo, Cleber Cunha Boëchat, Iola Gonçalves Maruyama, Lídia Sumile Oliveira, Lucas Chagas Muñoz-Peñuela, Marcela Pompêo, Marcelo Luiz Martins Mostrar mais 3 Orientador Coorientador Pós-graduação Curso de graduação Título da Revista ISSN da Revista Título de Volume Editor Elsevier Tipo Artigo Direito de acesso Acesso aberto Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146649 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.146649 Resumo It has been postulated that eutrophication causes replacement of n3 highly unsaturated fatty acids (n3 HUFA) rich taxa, such as Bacillariophyta, Cryptophyta and Dinophyta, with taxa poor in these fatty acids (FA), such as Chlorophyta and Cyanobacteria. Such a change in community composition at the basis of the food web may alter the FA composition of consumer tissues. Here, we investigated the effects of eutrophication on phytoplankton composition and FA profiles of seston and muscle of two omnivorous fish species (Astyanax fasciatus and Astyanax altiparanae) from reservoirs of different trophic status in Southeast Brazil. The phytoplankton composition and seston FA profiles reflected the degree of eutrophication at most of the studied sites. Three of the five most eutrophic sites were dominated by cyanobacteria and had the highest saturated fatty acid (SFA) and lowest polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) relative contents among all sites. In contrast, the remaining two sites presented a higher phytoplankton diversity and higher relative contribution of sestonic PUFAs with 18 carbons (C18) and HUFAs than less eutrophic systems. However, there were no clear effects of sestonic FA profiles on the FA profiles of muscle of both fish species. A higher percentage of n3 HUFAs was found in the fish samples from a hypereutrophic and cyanobacteria dominated reservoir than in those from sites with a more diverse phytoplankton community in which fish mainly showed higher percentages of C18 PUFA. These results suggest a lack of a direct relationship between the degree of eutrophication and the percentage of n3 HUFAs in both fish species, which can be caused by specific characteristics of the reservoirs that may modulate eutrophication effects. Therefore, consumer FA biochemistry seemed to be dictated by their ability to select, accumulate, and modify dietary FAs, rather than by the eutrophication degree of the studied tropical reservoirs. Mostrar mais Descrição Palavras-chave Astyanax Phytoplankton Polyunsaturated fatty acids Trophic transfer Water pollution Idioma Inglês Citação Science of the Total Environment, v. 781. URI http://hdl.handle.net/11449/206260 Itens relacionados Financiadores Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) Coleções Artigos Unidades Departamentos Cursos de graduação Programas de pós-graduação Estatísticas de acesso
 Página do item completo Outras formas de acesso doi Dimensions Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" Configurações de cookies Configurações de acessibilidade Política de privacidade Sobre o Repositório Institucional UNESP Perguntas frequentes (FAQ) Enviar uma sugestão