ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13157-026-02117-9
 Chance Hines
chhines@wm.edu
Laura Duval
lsduval@wm.edu
Bryan D. Watts
bdwatt@wm.edu
Molly Mitchell
molly@vims.edu
1 Center for Conservation Biology, William & Mary, 
Williamsburg, Virginia, USA
2 Virginia Institute for Marine Science, William & Mary, 
Gloucester Point, Virginia, USA
Abstract
Saltmarsh habitats provide numerous ecosystem services, including carbon storage, but are eroding at increasingly rapid 
rates due to ongoing sea level rise. Yet, where space and topography permit, saltmarshes are transgressing into adjacent 
uplands and counterbalancing the lost area. In these areas, older portions of marshes have accumulated more soil organic 
matter (SOM) over time than more recently formed marshes, though processes driving this pattern can be complex. Sedi -
ment deposition dynamics and plant community can influence SOM with both playing important but interacting roles. 
We used structural equation modeling to explore how surface SOM and plant communities vary across saltmarshes in the 
Chesapeake Bay region of Virginia, USA. We evaluated the influence of geomorphic origin (young vs. old), agricultural 
legacy, and two principal components, PC1, driven by hydrological conditions, and PC2, driven by salinity gradients on 
surface SOM and plant responses. We found that species-specific plant cover and tree counts were each affected by differ -
ent combinations of these factors. Surface SOM was greatest in marshes formed prior to 1937, with an agricultural legacy, 
higher PC1 scores, lower PC2 scores, greater nearby Phragmites australis cover, and more nearby snags. We also found 
important indirect effects, whereby landscape history and environmental predictors influenced surface SOM accumula -
tion through their effects on plants. We hypothesize that elevated surface SOM in areas with an agricultural legacy may 
result from restricted tidal flooding and reduced inorganic sediment input, conditions potentially created by the presence 
of berms. However, further investigation is necessary to conclusively address this issue.
Keywords Saltmarsh · Marsh migration · Agricultural legacy · Soil organic matter · Land-use history · Climate change 
impacts · Carbon sequestration
Received: 20 May 2025 / Accepted: 30 July 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
The Role Geomorphic Origin and Agricultural Legacy on Plant 
Communities and Surface Soil Organic Matter in Salt Marshes
Chance Hines1  · Laura Duval1 · Bryan D. Watts1 · Molly Mitchell2
Introduction
Saltmarsh habitat loss is accelerating due to increasingly 
rapid rates of ongoing sea level rise (SLR) even as new 
saltmarsh is also rapidly transgressing into uplands where 
topography is suitable for marsh migration (Ezer and Cor -
lett 2012, Ablain et al. 2019; Fagherazzi et al. 2020). Glob-
ally, more saltmarsh has been lost than formed over recent 
decades, but the rate of marsh creation has compensated for 
marsh lost to SLR in some regions (Kirwan and Megoni -
gal 2013 , Raabe and Stumpf 2016; Schnieder et al. 2018, 
Campbell et al. 2022). Marsh loss typically occurs in the 
oldest portions of marsh via edge erosion (Wasson et al. 
2019; Mariotti 2020) while marsh transgression into uplands 
is a key component of saltmarsh formation, albeit often 
impeded by barriers such as flood prevention infrastructure 
or steep terrain (Roman 2017; Miller et al. 2021). However, 
the implications of recently transgressive marsh replacing 
1 3
 111 Page 2 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
long-established marsh are not fully understood. Here, we 
focus on surface soil organic matter (SOM) as an indicator 
of recent organic material accumulation, rather than a direct 
measure of carbon stocks or long-term sequestration.
Maintaining saltmarsh habitat extent is important because 
it is among the world’s most efficient ecosystems for long-
term carbon burial and storage (Pennings and Bertness 
2001; Mcleod et al. 2011). Saltmarsh soils include a rela -
tively high proportion of peat, which is a carbon-rich mate-
rial that consists of partially decomposed organic matter that 
accumulates in waterlogged and acidic conditions (Drexler 
2011). This peat is primarily derived from plant material 
that grew within the marsh and the ability of marsh soils to 
accrete peat can vary based on a range of factors including 
plant species composition, tidal dynamics, sediment depo -
sition, and other environmental conditions (Nyman et al. 
2006; Turner et al. 2000). These factors not only influence 
organic matter accumulation but also determine the marsh’s 
capacity to adapt to rising sea levels, ensuring its long-term 
sustainability and its role as a vital carbon sink (Chmura 
2013; Stevenson et al. 1986).
Saltmarsh plants are one of the primary drivers of peat 
formation and both root growth and above-ground biomass 
contribute (Nyman et al. 2006). Root systems help stabilize 
the soil and promote vertical accretion by binding the soil and 
facilitating the accumulation of organic matter while above-
ground biomass, including stems and leaves, can contribute 
to above-ground carbon storage, which can eventually be 
transferred to the soil as plant material decomposes (Cahoon 
et al. 2021; Sarika and Zikos 2021). Different plant species 
may influence the rate of peat accumulation in varying ways 
due to differences in root depth, growth patterns, and biomass 
production. Species that have deeper or more extensive root 
systems may facilitate more substantial soil stabilization and 
carbon sequestration (Bass et al. 2022). Additionally, marsh 
plant species composition can affect the overall SOM within 
the marsh, as species with higher root biomass and slower 
decomposition rates tend to increase peat accumulation more 
effectively than those with faster turnover rates.
Saltmarsh soils also include inorganic sediment, like 
sand, which is deposited from the water column during 
high tide flooding as well as from adjacent upslope areas 
following rain events (Pannozzi et al. 2023). Deposition of 
sediment is important to marsh persistence because it con -
tributes to marsh accretion and areas with greater sediment 
deposition are better able to keep pace with SLR (Stevenson 
et al. 1986; Weston et al. 2023). Plant species play a key 
role in trapping and stabilizing these sediments, particu -
larly through the above-ground biomass, which slows water 
flow and promotes sediment deposition (Stumpf 1983). The 
structural complexity of plant communities can enhance the 
accumulation of inorganic sediments, thus further increasing 
marsh elevation and resilience against rising sea levels (Kir-
wan and Megonigal 2013; Granse et al. 2024).
Soils in older portions of marshes typically hold the high-
est carbon stocks because the proportion of organic matter 
and soil depths are greater (Mcleod et al. 2011; Theuerkauf 
et al. 2015). However, these portions of the marsh are most 
often the outermost and more susceptible to erosion than 
newly formed marsh along the upland boundary. As a result, 
marshes can transition from acting as carbon sinks to car -
bon sources when marsh loss exceeds marsh creation. Even 
in regions where rapid upland transgression (the landward 
migration of marshes) compensates for marsh loss, salt -
marshes may still become a carbon sink (Smith and Kirwan 
2021). This shift can occur if the carbon footprint of the 
newly created marsh is less than that of the carbon-rich marsh 
that is lost, especially if the replacement marsh is younger, 
less developed, or lacks the same peat accumulation.
Barriers to marsh migration vary widely across land -
scapes, with urban development representing a well-doc -
umented obstacle to upland transgression (Enwright et al. 
2016). Coastal cities and towns often have seawalls, levees, 
roads, and other infrastructure that physically prevent salt -
marshes from expanding inland in response to SLR, effec -
tively creating a “coastal squeeze” (Silva et al. 2020). In 
contrast, rural areas generally offer greater opportunities for 
marsh migration due to the presence of undeveloped land 
and fewer artificial barriers (Kirwan and Gedan 2019). How-
ever, a less recognized but potentially significant challenge 
to marsh expansion in these regions is the legacy of past 
agricultural use. In some rural coastal areas, past agricul -
tural lands are surrounded by berms, dikes, or ditches that 
were historically constructed, presumably, to protect crops 
from saltwater intrusion (Mora and Burdick 2013). These 
features persist as the landscape transitions from agricultural 
to saltmarsh, potentially limiting the ability of marshes to 
naturally migrate into adjacent uplands even when SLR and 
tidal dynamics would otherwise allow it. Unlike urban bar -
riers, agricultural berms may be undocumented, partially 
degraded, or only intermittently breached, creating complex 
and uncertain conditions for marsh migration as well as plant 
establishment (Mora and Burdick 2013). Understanding the 
extent to which these legacy structures act as barriers is a key 
research need as conservationists and land managers seek to 
maintain saltmarsh resilience in the face of climate change.
The goal of this study is to assess how marshes of differ-
ing geomorphic origin, specifically, recently transgressive 
marshes (young) versus long-established marshes (old), 
differ in terms of surface SOM, which represents recent 
organic material accumulation. Additionally, this study aims 
to evaluate how physical barriers, specifically berms asso -
ciated with agricultural legacies, may modulate SOM and 
plant community composition.
1 3
Page 3 of 12 111 
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
Methods
Study Area
The study took place on the Delmarva Peninsula in Virginia, 
USA (Fig. 1) in saltmarshes along the eastern shore of the 
Chesapeake Bay (hereafter, eastern shore). The eastern shore 
is predominantly rural and agriculture has been a prominent 
industry both historically and in the present day (Gemmill 
1926, Lakshmi 2024). This landscape is particularly suit -
able for studying agricultural legacy effects because many 
marshes remain bordered by remnant agricultural berms 
and have experienced relatively little urban development 
compared to more heavily modified estuaries. Additionally, 
unlike many marshes farther north, these systems were not 
extensively mosquito-ditched, allowing historical land-use 
impacts to be evaluated with fewer confounding alterations. 
Agricultural activities have historically occurred immedi -
ately upslope of saltmarsh but those in lower-lying lands 
become increasingly unsuitable over time due to saltwater 
intrusion (Gedan and Fernández-Pascual 2019). Salt water 
in this area flows from the Atlantic Ocean into the Chesa -
peake Bay, delivering sediment from offshore sources and 
influencing marsh development.
Desktop review
We used the Virginia Institute for Marine Science (VIMS) 
shoreline change viewer (Hardaway et al. 2021), which 
includes aerial photography from 1937 on the bayside to 
determine whether the historic habitat was high marsh, low 
marsh, upland, or water and imagery hosted on the VIMS 
shoreline change viewer from 2021 to classify the current 
habitat (Fig. 2). The imagery from 1937 was used because it 
was the earliest consistent imagery, not because it represents 
an ecological threshold. We considered high marsh habitat 
to be dominated by short form of Sporobolus alterniflorus 
(Spartina alterniflora) and Distichlis spicata which were rep-
resented by light gray tones in historic imagery and tan tones 
in modern imagery (A, Fig. 2). We considered low marsh to 
be dominated by tall S. alterniflorus (Spartina alterniflora) 
and Juncus roemerianus which was represented by darker 
tones in historic and modern imagery (B, Fig. 2). Upland 
habitat was delineated by the presence of fallow fields and 
actively farmed land or trees and shrubs which are dark in 
historic imagery and green in modern and can also be identi-
fied by their shape in both historic and modern imagery (C, 
Fig. 2). We also classified survey sites as a former agricul -
tural field if berms or ditches (i.e., agricultural legacy) sur -
rounded a survey point (D, Fig. 2), though some berms may 
have originally served other purposes, such as protecting 
residences or low-lying land from flooding, and their precise 
age and function are often uncertain (Hall et al. 2022). Dur-
ing review of the historical imagery, active agricultural fields 
consistently exhibited berms or ditches, and no residences 
or other non-agricultural structures were visible within these 
fields, supporting our classification approach.
We acknowledge that some uncertainty is inherent in 
classifying habitats from aerial imagery. For example, 
short-form S. alterniflora can occur at lower elevations than 
S. patens and D. spicata, but in aerial imagery, the short-
form cannot be reliably distinguished from D. spicata or S. 
patens, whereas tall-form S. alterniflora is visually distinct. 
Similarly, some berms may have originally served other 
purposes, such as protecting residences or low-lying land 
from flooding, and their precise age and function are often 
uncertain (Hall et al. 2022) but during review of historical 
imagery, active agricultural fields consistently exhibited 
berms or ditches, and no residences or other non-agricul -
tural structures were visible within these fields. Although 
these features may not perfectly reflect historic marsh con -
ditions, we expect our focus on broader historic habitat cat-
egories to remain robust.
Site Selection 
Survey areas were selected based on our ability to access them 
from adjacent uplands, sample as many points within a marsh 
during a single morning as possible, sample both old and new 
marsh, and include areas with and without an agricultural leg-
acy. We selected 89 points that were placed ≥ 200 m from the 
nearest neighboring survey point. Additionally, survey points 
were placed within marshes where the habitat was similar 
within 50 m, ensuring points were ≥ 50 m from the nearest dif-
ferent-aged marsh or marsh with a different agricultural history.
Field Protocol 
We collected finer scale habitat predictors between 10 Jun 
and 31 July 2022 at all points. We visually estimated % 
cover for all plant species that comprised ≥ 5% cover within 
50 m of each survey point as well as the number of living 
trees and snags within 50 m of each survey point. We quan-
tified the % organic matter in soils by extracting three 7.62 
cm diameter, 15.24 cm deep samples at the center of each 
survey point. The % Soil Organic Matter (SOM) was deter-
mined using a loss-on-ignition protocol (Heiri et al. 2001). 
All cores were stored in a zipper storage bag for two days, 
transferred to an aluminum tray, dried at 60 °C until their 
weights became stable, and then muffled at 450 °C for 7 h. 
The loss-on-ignition method used here provides a reliable 
and widely used metric for comparing relative differences in 
SOM among sites, although it is not intended for estimating 
absolute carbon stocks. 
1 3
 111 Page 4 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
 
1 3
Page 5 of 12 111 
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
Statistical Analyses
We took the mean for the three replicate soil samples from 
each point and compared percentages of SOM between 
marshes with and without evidence of past agricultural 
use with a paired t-test. We also compared those that were 
recently created and those that existed since the early-mid 
20th century with paired t-tests. To evaluate whether newly 
created marshes occurred at systematically higher eleva -
tions than older marshes, we compared mean plot elevation 
between age categories using Welch’s two-sample t-test, 
which does not assume equal variances.
We used a structural equation model (SEM) in a Bayes -
ian framework with the ‘brms’ package (Bürkner 2017) in 
Program R (R Core Team 2023) so that we could estimate 
both direct and indirect effects of predictors on response 
variables. Our SEM was intended as an exploratory frame -
work to identify dominant pathways linking environmental 
gradients, vegetation, and SOM, rather than to establish 
definitive causal relationships. Within our SEM, we speci -
fied 10 individual regressions corresponding to the follow -
ing response variables: SOM, and plant cover for 8 species, 
tree counts, and snag counts. We included all plant spe -
cies individually rather than grouping by functional type 
because the marsh community is relatively simple, and 
each species may contribute differently to carbon accumu -
lation. We were interested in plant and SOM responses to 
predictors that might affect plant occurrence as well as soil 
composition. Included among these were several likely to 
covary such as salinity, tidal range, the number of days that 
tidal flooding exceeded 0.5 m during the study year, surface 
elevation (± 10 cm, VGIN 2018), and latitude. We calcu -
lated tidal range and the number of days during the study 
year when tidal flooding exceeded 0.5 m using tidal data 
derived from the nearest NOAA tide gauges and adjust -
ing data using tidal offsets from the CO-OPS Discrete 
Tidal Zoning Map (NOAA 2017). We tested for covariance 
using Pearson correlation coefficients and used Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality 
of covarying predictors after centering and scaling them. 
Each species-specific plant and tree/snag count regression 
included the following predictors: The first two principal 
components, marsh age (pre- or post-1937), and pres -
ence of an agricultural legacy at the survey site. The SOM 
regression model incorporated the same predictors as the 
plant models but also included plant cover for each species 
and tree/snag counts to assess their influence on soil car -
bon accumulation. This allowed us to estimate the indirect 
effects of the predictors from the plant models on SOM. We 
also included a random effect for survey route (approxi -
mating marsh patch) to account for spatial autocorrelation 
among nearby survey points. To appropriately model our 
response variables, we used a beta distribution for SOM, 
zero-inflated beta distribution for species-specific plant 
covers, and a Poisson distribution for snag and tree counts. 
Given the large number of predictors in models, we incor -
porated a horseshoe prior (df = 1) to shrink the coefficients 
of uninformative predictors, thereby improving model par -
simony and preventing overfitting (Carvalho et al. 2009). 
Predictor importance was assessed based on the magnitude 
and direction of posterior median effect sizes and whether 
95% credible intervals excluded zero, indicating strong 
support for an association. Indirect effects were simplified 
by multiplying the coefficient of each upstream predictor 
by its proportional contribution in plant or tree/snags mod -
els, and combined (direct + indirect) credible intervals were 
estimated from posterior distributions. Only pathways with 
95% CI excluding zero were emphasized in figures and 
discussion to aid ecological interpretation. For our models, 
we ran four chains of 4,000 iterations with 2,000 warm-
up iterations. Chain convergence was verified by checking 
R-hat values (all of which were 1.00) and goodness of fit 
was inspected using posterior-predictive checks.
Indirect effects were calculated by multiplying the coef -
ficients of important predictors in the SOM regression by 
their relative contributions in upstream models (plant cover 
and tree count responses). The relative contribution of each 
predictor was determined by dividing its coefficient by the 
sum of the absolute values of all predictors in the corre -
sponding upstream model. We used posterior distributions 
for each model to estimate combined (direct and indirect) 
credible intervals.
Results
We surveyed 89 high marsh points including 41 points that 
were high marsh in 1937 and 48 points converted to saltmarsh 
since 1937. Mean elevation was not different between groups 
(T = -0.00675.96, p = 0.995) and was 0.56 ± 0.07 m ASL at long-
standing marshes compared to 0.56 ± 0.13 at more recently 
formed marshes. Evidence of past agriculture was present 
in 37 points including 16 (39.0%) that existed prior to 1937 
and 21 (43.8%) that formed since then. Most of the agricul-
tural use predated the historic imagery with 87.5% of recently 
formed marsh being forest in 1937 while 12.5% remained in 
agricultural use. All of the patches that were in agricultural 
use in 1937 converted to forest before converting to saltmarsh.
Fig. 1 Map of study area and points surveyed on the bayside of the 
Delmarva Peninsula, Virginia, USA during 2022. Triangles represent 
marsh patches that were high marsh in 1937 while circles represent 
points marsh patches that have converted from uplands since 1937. 
Blue represents points where berms or ditches associated with past 
agricultural use surround the survey point while orange represents 
points where no evidence of agriculture exists
1 3
 111 Page 6 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
Environmental Variables
We detected covariance among latitude, salinity, tidal range, 
tidal flooding frequency and mean elevation. Among these 
variables, Latitude had positive correlations with tidal 
range (0.77) and elevation (0.53) but negative correlations 
with salinity (-0.91) and number of days where tidal flood -
ing exceeded 0.5 m (-0.74). The first two principal com -
ponents of our PCA explained the majority of variation 
in the dataset, with standard deviations of 1.64 (32.2% of 
variance explained) and 0.97 (19%), respectively. PC3-PC5 
explained a combined 31.7% of the variance. We included 
PC1 and PC2 in all downstream models. PC1 primarily cap-
tured a gradient related to geographic position and broad-
scale hydrological variation, with latitude having a strong 
positive loading, while elevation and tidal range both had 
moderate positive loadings and salinity, and flooding fre -
quency had moderate negative loadings. PC2, in contrast, 
appeared to represent a salinity-driven gradient, with salin -
ity having a strong negative loading, tidal range and ele -
vation both having moderate negative loadings, and tidal 
flooding having a small negative loading (Table 1).
Plant Cover 
Eight plant species were observed at >5% of survey loca -
tions (Fig 3) and the most common was D. spicata (92.1% 
of plots, n = 89) while the least common was S. pungens 
(21.3% of plots). Live trees were observed at 67.4% of 
points and the average number of trees per plot was 13.3 
while snags were observed at 75.3% of plots with a mean 
of 23.1 per plot.
While our structural equation model (SEM) was used as 
an exploratory framework rather than to establish defini -
tive causal relationships, it provided insight into dominant 
pathways linking environmental predictors, vegetation, and 
SOM. Predictors that were important for species-specific 
plant covers and tree counts varied by response (Fig. 3). 
Whether a marsh formed before or after 1937 and whether 
a site supported an agricultural legacy were important pre -
dictors for six plant species, trees, and snags. PC1 was an 
important predictor for six plant species and living trees 
while PC2 was an important predictor for eight plant spe -
cies and snags. Marshes formed since 1937 supported less 
short and tall S. alterniflorus, S. pumilus, and I. frutescens 
Table 1 Principal component loadings for the first two components of 
the principal component analsyis
Predictor PC1 PC2
Latitude 0.550614 0.114735
Salinity -0.33798 -0.75149
Tidal flooding -0.48062 -0.12625
Tidal range 0.432812 -0.47218
Elevation 0.405302 -0.42802
Fig. 3 Plant species found on > 10% of survey plots with the number of 
plots where each was present (n), and the coefficient with 95% credible 
intervals for predictors in each response-specific regression within our 
structural equation model. number of survey points (n) that each plant 
or tree type that was Plant species and tree count responses with the 
effect size and 95% credible intervals
 
Fig. 2 Historic (1937) and current 
(2021) imagery of a marsh on the 
bayside of Accomack County, 
V A. Features on this image 
include high marsh (A), low 
marsh (B), forest (C), and two 
agricultural fields (D) that had 
already been abandoned by 1937
 
1 3
Page 7 of 12 111 
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
but supported more D. spicata, P . australis, trees and snags. 
Areas with an agricultural legacy supported more S. pumi-
lus, D. spicata, S. pungens, I. frutescens, P . australis, and 
trees while they supported less short and tall S. alterniflo-
rus and J. roemerianus. PC1 positively influenced cover for 
S. pumilus, S. pungens, I. frutescens, and tree counts while 
negatively influencing J. roemerianus, short S. alterniflorus, 
D. spicata . PC2 was positively associated with short and 
tall S. alterniflorus, S. pumilus, D. spicata, S. pungens while 
negatively influencing J. roemerianus, I. frutescens, P . aus-
tralis, and snags.
Soil organic matter
For direct effects within our SEM, SOM was negatively 
associated with recently formed marshes (-0.78, -1.16:-
0.40) and PC2 (-0.17; -0.35:-0.00) and positively associated 
with PC1 (0.41, 0.20:0.63), snags (0.22, 0.01:0.42), and 
P . australis cover (0.19, 0.02:0.37). Though 95% CI over -
lapped zero, the absolute coefficient size for agricultural 
legacy (0.23, -0.09:0.56) was greater than that of all other 
predictor coefficients except for PC1 and marsh age.
For direct effects within our SEM, SOM was consistently 
lower in recently formed marshes (-0.78; 95% CI: -1.16 
to -0.40) and areas with higher PC2 scores (-0.17; -0.35 
to -0.00), and higher in marshes with elevated PC1 scores 
(0.41; 0.20 to 0.63), greater snag counts (0.22; 0.01 to 0.42), 
and higher P . australis cover (0.19; 0.02 to 0.37). Although 
the 95% credible interval for agricultural legacy overlapped 
zero (-0.09 to 0.56), the magnitude of its effect (0.23) was 
larger than all other predictors except marsh age and PC1, 
indicating relative importance.
SOM was also shaped by indirect effects mediated 
through snag counts and P . australis cover. For recently 
created marshes, positive indirect effects partly offset nega-
tive direct effects, reducing the magnitude by 29.5% (-0.54; 
-0.89 to -0.17). For areas with an agricultural legacy, positive 
indirect effects increased the overall coefficient by 36.6% 
(0.32; -0.01 to 0.65). Indirect effects for PC1 included a 
small positive contribution from snags and a slight offset 
from P . australis, resulting in an overall 10–36% increase in 
effect size (0.46; 0.24 to 0.66). Overall, predicted SOM was 
highest in older marshes with an agricultural legacy (Fig. 4).
Discussion
We expected older marshes to exhibit greater surface organic 
matter (SOM) due to longer periods of sediment accumula-
tion and organic matter inputs. Our results largely aligned 
with those expectations and we found that marsh surface 
soils in earlier stages of development, specifically those 
formed since 1937, tend to have lower SOM. Marsh age was 
the strongest predictor of SOM in our analysis, consistent 
with research indicating that marshes accumulate organic 
matter over time and older marsh patches have more SOM 
(Mcleod et al. 2011; Theuerkauf et al. 2015). This pattern 
supports the idea that newly formed marshes do not provide 
the same carbon storage potential as older marshes.
Marsh age also played an important role in shaping the 
plant communities at our study sites. Four plants were more 
abundant at older marshes, though two of these were distinct 
forms of the same species (short and tall forms of S. alter-
niflorus), while two were more abundant in newer marshes. 
The greater abundance of both S. alterniflora forms in older 
areas likely stems from their high tolerance of both inunda-
tion and saline growing conditions (Bertness et al. 1992 A). 
These older marsh sections are typically located closer to 
the marsh–water interface, where longer inundation periods 
lead to more saline soils than those found near the upland 
edge and S. alterniflora can outcompete species less tolerant 
of the saline hydrological conditions.
Competition likely plays a role in shaping other species 
distribution as well. We believe the association between D. 
spicata and marsh age was driven by interspecific interac -
tions. D. spicata has similar salt and inundation tolerances as 
S. pumilus but was more abundant in more recently formed 
marsh while S. pumilus was more abundant in older marsh, 
possibly because D. spicata often colonizes disturbed areas 
but is outcompeted by S. pumilus over time (Crain et al. 
Fig. 4 Median posterior predictions for soil organic matter at marshes 
that formed before and after 1937 in areas with and without an agricul-
tural legacy. Error bars represent standard deviation of predicted mean 
values across posterior draws
 
1 3
 111 Page 8 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
2008). I. frutescens was more abundant in older portions 
of the marsh possibly because those portions of the marsh 
are more saline, suppressing other shrubby species. Saline 
growing conditions restrict other shrubs like M. cerifera 
and B. halimifolia that outcompete I. frutescens in the more 
recently formed, less saline portions of the marsh (Bertness 
et al. 1992B).
The only other plant that was more abundant in more 
recently formed marsh was P . australis and the effect of 
marsh age was approximately 10 times as great as for D. 
spicata. P . australis is an exotic invasive in Virginia and 
is known to competitively exclude other plant species by 
forming thick monotypic stands (Hazelton et al. 2014). 
While P . australis is tolerant of prolonged inundation, it is 
not as tolerant of saline conditions as other plants in our 
study (Hellings and Gallagher 1992; Lonard et al. 2013). 
As marshes develop and mature inland, their elevation 
relative to tidal flooding can decrease, leading to more fre -
quent and prolonged periods of inundation as well as more 
saline conditions, which limits P . australis’ ability to per -
sist, potentially reducing its dominance over time (Vasquez 
et al. 2006). This pattern was also evident for trees, which 
often die as a result of increased inundation and salinity 
(Pezeshki et al. 1990), that were more abundant in more 
recently formed marshes. Our contention that salinity is 
driving these processes is supported by our finding that the 
principal component most strongly driven by salinity (PC2) 
negatively influenced snag counts and P . australis while 
positively influencing tall S. alterniflorus, the most salt-tol-
erant of plants at our site (Bertness et al. 1992 A).
Our PCA results highlighted more than just the effect of 
salinity on plant communities as both PC1 and PC2 were 
important in predicting SOM. The first component (PC1), 
which was primarily driven by a geographic and hydrologi-
cal gradient, had a positive effect on surface SOM concen -
tration, while the second (PC2), a gradient most strongly 
driven by salinity, had a smaller negative effect. The strong 
positive loading of latitude on PC1 suggests that geographic 
position may be influencing SOM concentration, potentially 
serving as a proxy for factors not explicitly included in the 
PCA, such as sediment supply. Lower-latitude sites in our 
study area likely receive greater inputs of inorganic sedi -
ment due to proximity to the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, 
where large deposits of sand flow northward up the east -
ern shore of the Bay (Colman et al. 1988). Increased inor-
ganic sediment supply could dilute SOM, leading to lower 
SOM concentrations at these sites but could also increase 
the potential for the marsh to accrete and keep pace with 
SLR. Meanwhile, the negative effect of PC2 suggests that 
higher salinity and reduced tidal range may create condi -
tions less favorable for organic matter retention, reinforcing 
the importance of broader environmental gradients in shap-
ing marsh soil properties.
The habitat in former agricultural fields appear to be par-
ticularly influenced by the interacting dynamics captured in 
our principal components, potentially because legacy berms 
act as partial barriers to tidal exchange, restricting saltwa -
ter intrusion while simultaneously impounding freshwater 
within the marsh interior. This hydrological modification 
may dampen the salinity-driven effects observed in PC2, 
which is consistent with the persistence of P . australis and 
trees in these areas by limiting their exposure to frequent 
tidal flooding and high salinity. However, by reducing tidal 
exchange, these same features may also be associated with 
reduced sediment deposition, particularly the input of inor -
ganic material that typically accompanies tidal flooding (Kir-
wan and Megonigal 2013). Given that PC1 was positively 
associated with SOM concentration, areas with greater tidal 
exchange and greater potential for sediment deposition may 
experience a dilution effect, where greater inorganic inputs 
decrease the relative concentration of SOM. While a greater 
concentration of surface SOM may align with higher carbon 
storage, this accumulation may be offset by hydrological 
conditions that do not favor long-term carbon sequestration, 
such as extended periods of standing water or prolonged 
anaerobic conditions (Mitsch and Gosselink 2015). These 
findings align with studies showing that hydrologic altera -
tion can create spatial variability in marsh structure and 
function, with impounded areas often exhibiting distinct 
plant communities and soil characteristics compared to tid -
ally connected marshes (Watson et al. 2017).
In addition to altering tidal exchange and sediment 
deposition, agricultural legacy structures may also influ -
ence plant community dynamics by creating physical and 
hydrological barriers to colonization. By restricting saltwa-
ter intrusion and maintaining areas of lower salinity, berms 
could facilitate the persistence of P . australis, which thrives 
in conditions with reduced tidal influence. At the same time, 
the slightly elevated topography of berms could provide 
refugia for trees and snags, allowing them to persist in an 
otherwise flood-prone landscape. These berms, along with 
the ditches often found adjacent to them, may also act as 
barriers to marsh plant colonization across the broader land-
scape. Within the bermed areas, species that spread through 
rhizomes, like P . australis, may persist and expand but the 
berms limit their ability to spread beyond the berms. This 
pattern was frequently observed, with distinct plant com -
munities occurring on either side of the berms (Fig. 5). Such 
hydrologic and physical constraints highlight the lasting 
influence of past land use on marsh recovery and underscore 
the importance of considering legacy structures in coastal 
wetland management.
1 3
Page 9 of 12 111 
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
While the influence of berms and ditches associated with 
agricultural legacy on tidal exchange and plant community 
structure provides a compelling explanation for observed 
patterns, other factors related to past agricultural practices 
may also contribute to differences in SOM. Agricultural 
practices such as grazing, tilling, and planting can alter soil 
structure, organic inputs, and microbial communities in 
ways that continue to shape marsh soil formation (Wang et 
al. 2015). However, these practices are generally associated 
with lower SOM compared to areas that were never culti -
vated (Burden et al. 2013; Elschot et al. 2013; Wang et al. 
2015). Additionally, areas that were never cultivated may 
have supported forests for longer periods before transition -
ing to marsh, potentially influencing SOM accumulation 
through differences in initial soil properties. Again, our find-
ings were not consistent with the expected pattern because, 
typically, soil carbon is greater in older forests (Paul et al. 
2002).
As saltmarsh transgression accelerates due to rising sea 
levels, understanding how past land use influences carbon 
storage is crucial for accurately predicting future changes. 
The ability of saltmarshes to sequester and retain carbon as 
they migrate into former uplands depends on factors like 
sediment supply, plant community composition, and soil 
characteristics, all of which are shaped by historical land 
use. Whether agricultural legacies promote or hinder car -
bon sequestration, these past modifications will interact 
with ongoing environmental changes to influence marsh 
resilience. Given the rapid pace of these changes, assess -
ing how these factors impact long-term carbon storage is 
essential for managing coastal wetlands as effective carbon 
sinks. While management options for saltmarsh transgres -
sion into uplands are limited, targeted berm breaching could 
serve as a useful experimental manipulation to evaluate how 
hydrologic reconnection affects sediment deposition, veg -
etation composition, and surface soil development, provid -
ing valuable insights into strategies for enhancing carbon 
sequestration.
Saltmarsh transgression into upland habitats is primarily 
driven by sea level rise, though the process can be modulated 
by large pulses of sea water inundation as well as the land -
scape into which the saltmarsh is transgressing (Fagherazzi 
et al. 2019). In a saltmarsh transgression scenario driven by 
steady sea level rise and in absence of pulses of sea water 
and upslope barriers, SOM accumulation is driven by high 
carbon burial rates as marsh grasses overtake the upland 
habitat and existing organic matter degradation slows fol -
lowing inundation (Van Allen et al. 2021). After the uplands 
convert to saltmarsh, the rate of carbon accumulation slows 
and is largely based on the ability of marsh plants to persist, 
anchor the marsh substrate, and trap sediment suspended 
in the water column (Ford et al. 1999; Goodwin and Mudd 
2019). Without accumulation of sediment, vertical accretion 
is inhibited, leading to eventual marsh degradation and ero-
sion (Baranes et al. 2022).
For some marshes, pulses of sediment, like those associ-
ated with infrequent lunar and storm influenced tides, are 
necessary (Baranes et al. 2022; Goodwin and Mudd 2019) 
and marsh persistence is compromised when barriers to 
sediment supply exist (Fagherazzi et al. 2020; Enwright 
et al. 2016). We believe that berms associated with past 
agricultural practices act as a barrier and inhibit accumula -
tion of inorganic sediment that is deposited onto the marsh 
platform from the water column. This is in line with our 
finding that surface SOM was greater in former agricul -
tural fields than that found in saltmarsh without abandoned 
farm infrastructure, but this does not necessarily indicate a 
greater capacity for carbon sequestration but rather a dif -
ferent balance of sediment composition influenced by his -
torical land use practices. The berms associated with past 
agricultural use may have initially been erected as a mea -
sure of flood defense and may continue to alter hydrology 
(Hall et al. 2022). Many of these berms have fallen into dis-
repair and include breaches but retain the majority of their 
structure so that tidal flow and associated sediment deposi -
tion may still be restricted. Soils on the landward side of 
berms within other Chesapeake Bay saltmarshes are typi -
cally lower with shallower organic horizons than soils on 
the bayside of the berm (Hall et al. 2022), supporting this 
notion. Unfortunately, we did not age the soils and the soil 
Fig. 5 Aerial imagery of an abandoned agricultural field converting to 
saltmarsh in Accomack County, Virginia, USA. The middle of the field 
still supports shrubs and a handful of trees. The field is surrounded by 
berms and ditches that have inhibited colonization within the aban -
doned field by J. roemerianus, most noticeably along the southwest 
border. Shrubs can also be seen growing along the southernmost por -
tion of the elevated southeast berm between the saltmarsh vegetation
 
1 3
 111 Page 10 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
cores we extracted were only 6” deep so we were unable to 
quantify depth of organic layer. However, the more highly 
concentrated organic material within the topmost 6” is con-
sistent with a reduced capacity for accreting inorganic sedi-
ment. If our observations reflect reduced sediment input, 
this could limit the overall growth and vertical accretion of 
these marshes if deeper soil layers than we measured are 
also affected, potentially impacting their long-term carbon 
sequestration potential. Without new sediment deposits, the 
marshes may struggle to keep pace with sea level rise, ulti -
mately affecting their ability to function as effective carbon 
sinks. If these berms inhibit sediment deposition, the influ -
ence of berm height and the number of breaches in the berm 
may modify its influence on sediment deposition and war -
rants further investigation.
Our finding that recently converted marshes had lower 
surface-level SOM than those that were already marsh prior 
to the early-mid 20th century could have significant impli -
cations for carbon sequestration. Saltmarshes are among the 
world’s most efficient ecosystems for sequestering carbon 
but can serve as a sink when historical carbon stocks (i.e., 
SOM) are eroded faster than carbon can be accumulated in a 
marsh (Mcleod et al. 2011; Theuerkauf et al. 2015). Carbon 
stocks are relatively low in most upland soils adjacent to 
marshes, rapidly increase following transgression, and con-
tinue increasing at slower rates as they age so the oldest por-
tions of marshes often hold the most carbon stock (Miller et 
al. 2022; Langston et al. 2022). The relatively rapid rate of 
saltmarsh loss and creation may be contributing to an over-
all net loss of carbon stocks that Chesapeake Bay saltmarsh 
provides as older marsh is increasingly being replaced with 
more recently transgressed marsh.
Differences in vegetation communities found at our 
study sites support the distinction between newly created 
and longstanding marshes and that an agricultural legacy 
alters the dynamics of a marsh long after agriculture is 
abandoned. Unsurprisingly, both living and dead trees were 
more likely to be found in recently created marshes. Trees, 
particularly P . taeda, can persist within and adjacent to salt-
marsh for a number of years after the frequency and severity 
of tidal inundation becomes too severe for the recruitment 
of young trees (Kearney et al. 2019) while snags can per -
sist for decades after tree death (Kirwan and Gedan 2019). 
Several plant species were also affected by the recency 
of marsh creation and presence of an agricultural legacy 
though the underlying mechanisms behind these trends 
may vary. For instance, Phragmites australis, which is less 
tolerant of saline conditions than other common saltmarsh 
plants (Vasquez et al. 2006), likely benefits from suppressed 
tidal inundation, which creates fresher, more suitable grow-
ing conditions. For some plant species, the berms, which 
we propose act as barriers to tidal inundation, may also 
impede rhizomatic plant colonization. For example, J. roe-
merianus and both forms of S. alterniflorus primarily spread 
through rhizomatic growth and all had a negative relation -
ship with an agricultural legacy. Notably, J. roemerianus, 
which has expanded significantly throughout the region in 
recent decades, shows stark differences in establishment on 
either side of abandoned berms in some patches (Fig. 5). 
These barriers may favor the persistence of other marsh 
grasses, such as Distichlis spicata, as indicated by its posi -
tive relationship with agricultural legacies. A third way in 
which the agricultural legacy may continue to affect plant 
cover is that the berms may provide refugia to shrub species 
(Fig. 5). This notion is supported by the positive relation -
ship between an agricultural legacy and I. frutescens, which 
is less likely to be found in the lower, more saline portions 
of the marsh (Bertness et al. 1992B). While these patterns 
are consistent with the hypothesized influence of berms on 
plant communities, we emphasize that they represent plau -
sible mechanisms rather than proven causal effects.
Conclusion
As SLR rates continue increasing we expect saltmarsh 
attributes to continue shifting toward those found in more 
recently created marshes, specifically changes in plant com-
munity composition and surface-level SOM. Our results 
suggest that both marsh age and agricultural legacies may 
continue to shape vegetation structure, hydrology, and SOM 
decades after active use has ceased. Hydrologic connec -
tivity may be a key mechanism underlying these patterns. 
Berms associated with former agricultural use may alter 
tidal exchange and salinity regimes, potentially influenc -
ing vegetation composition and surface SOM dynamics. 
However, while we observed differences in surface SOM 
among marsh types, the implications for long-term carbon 
sequestration remain uncertain because deeper soil layers 
were not directly measured. Berm breaching could serve 
as an experimental management technique to evaluate how 
restoring hydrologic connectivity affects plant communities 
and sediment deposition. Such experimental approaches 
would improve understanding of how legacy structures 
interact with sea-level rise to shape marsh plant communi -
ties and carbon sequestration rates. Recognizing the persis -
tent influence of past land-use and tidal exchange is essential 
for interpreting marsh responses to ongoing environmental 
change. 
Acknowledgements We thank the numerous private landowners 
that granted us permission to survey their marshes. We thank Cait -
lin Dimaria, Jess Mehta, Maddie Was, Emma Purinton, Rylie Stras -
baugh, Will Burgoyne, and Erik Martin for assisting with field surveys; 
David Stanhope, Kory Angstadt, and Sean Gregory for collecting and 
1 3
Page 11 of 12 111 
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
processing sediment cores. We thank Ruth Boetcher and Shannon 
Alexander for providing assistance with permitting. Marie Pitts pro -
vided administrative and logistical support. Finally, we thank Erica 
Lawler from the William & Mary Office of Sponsored Programs who 
provided contracting assistance.
Author Contributions Study conception and design by Bryan D. 
Watts and Chance Hines, data collection was performed by Chance 
Hines, Laura Duval and Molly Mitchell, data analysis was performed 
by Chance Hines and Laura Duval. The first draft of the manuscript 
was written by Chance Hines and all authors commented on previous 
versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final 
manuscript.
Funding Funding for this project was provided by a grant through 
a United States Environmental Protection Agency Region 3 Wetland 
Program Development Grant (EPA-R3-WPDG-20-02).
Data Availability The datasets generated during and/or analyzed dur -
ing the current study are available from the corresponding author on 
reasonable request.
Declaration
Competing Interests The authors have no relevant financial or non-
financial interests to disclose. All authors contributed to the study con-
ception and design.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t t p : / / c r e a t i v e c o m m o n s . o 
r g / l i c e n s e s / b y / 4 . 0 / . 
References
Ablain M, Meyssignac B, Zawadzki L, Jugier R, Ribes A, Spada G, 
Benveniste J, Cazenave A, Picot N (2019) Uncertainty in satellite 
estimates of global mean sea-level changes, trend and accelera -
tion. Earth Syst Sci Data a 11:1189–1202
Baranes HE, Woodruff JD, Geyer WR, Yellen BC, Richardson JB, 
Griswold F (2022) Sources, mechanisms, and timescales of sedi-
ment delivery to a New England salt marsh. J Geophys Res Earth 
Surf 127: p.e2021JF006478.
Bass J, Granse D, Hache I, Jensen K, Karius V , Minden V , Stock M, 
Suchrow S, Kleyer M (2022) Plant traits affect vertical accretion 
of salt marshes. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 276:p108010
Bertness MD, Gough L, Shumway SW (1992A) Salt tolerances and the 
distribution of fugitive salt marsh plants. Ecology 73:1842–1851
Bertness MD, Wikler K, Chatkupt TOM (1992B) Flood tolerance 
and the distribution of Iva frutescens across New England salt 
marshes. Oecologia 91:171–178
Bürkner PC (2017) brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel mod-
els using Stan. J Stat Softw 80:1–28
Burden A, Garbutt RA, Evans CD, Jones DL, Cooper DM (2013) Carbon 
sequestration and biogeochemical cycling in a saltmarsh subject to 
coastal managed realignment. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci1 20:12–20
Cahoon DR, McKee KL, Morris JT (2021) How plants influence resil-
ience of salt marsh and mangrove wetlands to sea-level rise. Estu-
aries Coasts 44:883–898
Campbell AD, Fatoyinbo L, Goldberg L, Lagomasino D (2022) Global 
hotspots of salt marsh change and carbon emissions. Nature 
612:701–706
Chmura GL (2013) What do we need to assess the sustainability of the 
tidal salt marsh carbon sink? Ocean Coastal Manage 83:25–31
Colman SM, Berquist CR Jr, Hobbs CH III (1988) Structure, age and 
origin of the bay-mouth shoal deposits, Chesapeake Bay, Vir -
ginia. Mar Geol 83:95–113
Crain CM, Albertson LK, Bertness MD (2008) Secondary succession 
dynamics in estuarine marshes across landscape-scale salinity 
gradients. Ecology 89:2889–2899
Drexler JZ (2011) Peat formation processes through the millennia in 
tidal marshes of the Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta, California, 
USA. Estuaries Coasts 34:900–911
Elschot K, Bouma TJ, Temmerman S, Bakker JP (2013) Effects of 
long-term grazing on sediment deposition and salt-marsh accre -
tion rates. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 133:109–115
Enwright NM, Griffith KT, Osland MJ (2016) Barriers to and opportu-
nities for landward migration of coastal wetlands with sea-level 
rise. Front Ecol Environ 14:307–316
Ezer T, Corlett WB (2012) Is sea level rise accelerating in the Chesa -
peake Bay? A demonstration of a novel new approach for analyz-
ing sea level data. Geophys Res Lett 39:1–6
Fagherazzi S, Anisfeld SC, Blum LK, Long EV , Feagin RA, Fernandes 
A, Kearney WS, Williams K (2019) Sea level rise and the dynam-
ics of the marsh-upland boundary. Front Environ Sci 7:p25
Fagherazzi S, Mariotti G, Leonardi N, Canestrelli A, Nardin W, Kear-
ney WS (2020) Salt marsh dynamics in a period of accelerated sea 
level rise. J Geophys Res Earth Surf 125:e2019JF005200
Ford MA, Cahoon DR, Lynch JC (1999) Restoring marsh elevation in 
a rapidly subsiding salt marsh by thin-layer deposition of dredged 
material. Ecol Eng 12:189–205
Gallagher JL (1992) The effects of salinity and flooding on Phragmites 
australis. J Appl Ecol 29:41–49
Gedan KB, Fernández-Pascual E (2019) Salt marsh migration into 
salinized agricultural fields: A novel assembly of plant communi-
ties. J Veg Sci 30:1007–1016
Gemmill PF (1926) The Agriculture of the Eastern Shore Country. 
Econ Geogr 2:pp197–212
Goodwin GC, Mudd SM (2019) High platform elevations highlight 
the role of storms and spring tides in salt marsh evolution. Front 
Environ Sci 7:1–14
Granse D, Wanner A, Stock M, Jensen K, Mueller P (2024) Plant-sed-
iment interactions decouple inorganic from organic carbon stock 
development in salt marsh soils. Limnol Oceanogr Lett 9:469–477
Hall EA, Molino GD, Messerschmidt TC, Kirwan ML (2022) Hidden 
levees: Small-scale flood defense on rural coasts. Anthropocene 
40:p100350
Hardaway CS Jr, Milligan DA, Wilcox CA (2021) Shoreline Studies 
Program shoreline evolution database 1937–2021. h t t p : / / w w w . v i 
m s . e d u . Accessed 1 Jul 2024
Hazelton EL, Mozdzer TJ, Burdick DM, Kettenring KM, Whigham 
DF (2014) Phragmites australis management in the United States: 
40 years of methods and outcomes. AoB plants 6:plu001
Heiri O, Lotter AF, Lemcke G (2001) Loss on ignition as a method for 
estimating organic and carbonate content in sediments: reproduc-
ibility and comparability of results. J Paleolimnol 25:101–110
Kearney WS, Fernandes A, Fagherazzi S (2019) Sea-level rise and 
storm surges structure coastal forests into persistence and regen -
eration niches. PLoS ONE 14:pe0215977
1 3
 111 Page 12 of 12
Wetlands (2026) 46:111 
Kirwan ML, Gedan KB (2019) Sea-level driven land conversion and 
the formation of ghost forests. Nat Clim Chang 9:450–457
Kirwan ML, Megonigal JP (2013) Tidal wetland stability in the face of 
human impacts and sea-level rise. Nature 504:53–60
Lakshmi V (2024) Enhancing human resilience against climate change: 
Assessment of hydroclimatic extremes and sea level rise impacts 
on the Eastern Shore of Virginia, United States. Sci Total Environ 
947:174289
Langston AK, Coleman DJ, Jung NW, Shawler JL, Smith AJ, Wil -
liams BL, Wittyngham SS, Chambers RM, Perry JE, Kirwan ML 
(2022) The effect of marsh age on ecosystem function in a rapidly 
transgressing marsh. Ecosystems 25:252–264
Lonard RI, Judd FW, Stalter R (2013) The biological flora of coastal 
dunes and wetlands: Distichlis spicata (C. Linnaeus) E. Greene. 
Coast Res 29:105–117
Mariotti G (2020) Beyond marsh drowning: The many faces of marsh 
loss (and gain). Adv Wat Resour 144:103710
Mcleod E, Chmura GL, Bouillon S, Salm R, Björk M, Duarte CM, 
Lovelock CE, Schlesinger WH, Silliman BR (2011) A blueprint 
for blue carbon: toward an improved understanding of the role of 
vegetated coastal habitats in sequestering CO2. Front Ecol Envi -
ron 9:552–560
Miller CB, Rodriguez AB, Bost MC (2021) Sea-level rise, local -
ized subsidence, and increased storminess promote saltmarsh 
transgression across low-gradient upland areas. Quat Sci Rev 
265:107000
Miller CB, Rodriguez AB, Bost MC, McKee BA, McTigue ND (2022) 
Carbon accumulation rates are highest at young and expanding 
salt marsh edges. Commun Earth Environ 3:173
Mitsch WJ, Gosselink JG (2015) Wetlands. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 
New York, NY , USA
Mora JW, Burdick DM (2013) Effects of man-made berms upon plant 
communities in New England salt marshes. Wetlands ecol manag 
21:131–145
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) (2017) 
Discrete tidal zoning map. h t t p s : / / t i d e s a n d c u r r e n t s . n o a a . g o v / d t z 
. h t m l . Accessed 1 July 2024
Nyman JA, Walters RJ, Delaune RD, Patrick WH Jr (2006) Marsh 
vertical accretion via vegetative growth. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 
69:370–380
Pannozzo N, Leonardi N, Carnacina I, Smedley RK (2023) Storm sed-
iment contribution to salt marsh accretion and expansion. Geo -
morphology 430:108670
Paul KI, Polglase PJ, Nyakuengama JG, Khanna PK (2002) Change 
in soil carbon following afforestation. Ecol manag 168:241–257
Pennings SC, Bertness MD (2001) Salt marsh communities. Mar Com 
Ecol 11:289–316
Pezeshki SR, DeLaune RD, Patrick WH Jr (1990) Flooding and salt -
water intrusion: potential effects on survival and productivity of 
wetland forests along the US Gulf Coast. Ecol manag 33:287–301
R Core Team (2023) R: A language and environment for statistical 
computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Aus-
tria. https://www.R-project.org/
Raabe EA, Stumpf RP (2016) Expansion of tidal marsh in response to 
sea-level rise, Gulf Coast of Florida, USA. Estuaries and Coasts 
39:145–157
Roman CT (2017) Salt marsh sustainability: challenges during an 
uncertain future. Estuaries Coast 40:711–716
Sarika M, Zikos A (2021) Coastal salt marshes: structure and function 
of plant communities. In: Grigore, MN (ed) Handbook of Halo -
phytes: From Molecules to Ecosystems towards Biosaline Agri -
culture, Springer Nature, Cham, Switzerland pp 199–237
Schnieder NW, Walters DC, Kirwan ML (2018) Massive upland to 
wetland conversion compensated for historical marsh loss in 
Chesapeake Bay, USA. Estuaries Coast 41:940–951
Silva R, Martínez ML, van Tussenbroek BI, Guzmán-Rodríguez LO, 
Mendoza E, López-Portillo J (2020) A framework to manage 
coastal squeeze. Sustainability 12:10610
Smith AJ, Kirwan ML (2021) Sea level-driven marsh migration results 
in rapid net loss of carbon. Geophys Res Lett 48:pe2021GL092420
Stevenson JC, Ward LG, Kearne MS (1986) Vertical accretion in 
marshes with varying rates of sea level rise. Estuarine Variability. 
Academic, New York, pp 241–259
Stumpf RP (1983) The process of sedimentation on the surface of a salt 
marsh. Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 17:495–508
Theuerkauf EJ, Stephens JD, Ridge JT, Fodrie FJ, Rodriguez AB 
(2015) Carbon export from fringing saltmarsh shoreline erosion 
overwhelms carbon storage across a critical width threshold. 
Estuar Coast Shelf Sci 164:367–378
Turner RE, Swenson EM, Milan CS (2000) Organic and inorganic con-
tributions to vertical accretion in salt marsh sediments. In: Wein-
stein MP, Kreeger DA (eds) Concepts and Controversies in Tidal 
Marsh Ecology. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Berlin, Germany, 
pp. 583–595
Van Allen R, Schreiner KM, Guntenspergen G, Carlin J (2021) 
Changes in organic carbon source and storage with sea level rise-
induced transgression in a Chesapeake Bay marsh. Estuar Coast 
Shelf Sci 261:107550
Vasquez EA, Glenn EP, Guntenspergen GR, Brown JJ, Nelson SG (2006) 
Salt tolerance and osmotic adjustment of Spartina alterniflora (Poa-
ceae) and the invasive M haplotype of Phragmites australis (Poa-
ceae) along a salinity gradient. Amer Journ Bot 93:1784–1790
Virginia Geographic Information Network (VGIN) (2018) Virginia 
geographic information network: virginia LiDAR download 
application. h t t p s : / / v g i n . v d e m . v i r g i n i a . g o v / a p p s / V G I N : : v i r g i n i a l 
i d a r d o w n l o a d a p p l i c a t i o n / e x p l o r e . Accessed 01 Jul 2024
Wang P, Liu Y , Li L, Cheng K, Zheng J, Zhang X, Zheng J, Joseph S, 
Pan G (2015) Long-term rice cultivation stabiliizes soil organic 
carbon and promotes soil microbial activity in a salt marsh 
derived soil chronosequencety. Sci Rep 5:1570
Wasson K, Ganju NK, Defne Z, Endris C, Elsey-Quirk T, Thorne KM, 
Freeman CM, Guntenspergen G, Nowacki DJ, Raposa KB (2019) 
Understanding tidal marsh trajectories: evaluation of multiple 
indicators of marsh persistence. Env Res Lett 14:124073
Watson EB, Wigand C, Davey EW, Andrews HM, Bishop J, Raposa 
KB (2017) Wetland loss patterns and inundation-productivity 
relationships prognosticate widespread salt marsh loss for south -
ern New England. Estuaries Coasts 40:662–681
Weston NB, Rodriguez E, Donnelly B, Solohin E, Jezycki K, Dem -
berger S, Sutter LA, Morris JT, Neubauer SC, Craft C (2023) 
Recent acceleration of wetland accretion and carbon accumula -
tion along the US East Coast. Earths Future 11:e2022EF003037
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.