ПРИЛОЗИ, Одделение за природно-математички и биотехнички науки, МАНУ, том 44, бр. 1–2, стр. 303–314 (2023) 
CONTRIBUTIONS, Section of Natural, Mathematical and Biotechnical Sciences, MASA, Vol. 44, No. 1–2, pp. 303–314 (2023) 
 
Received: September 14, 2024 ISSN 1857–9027 
Accepted: November 22, 2024 e-ISSN 1857–9949 
 UDC: 
DOI: 10.20903/masa/nmbsci.2023.44.31 
 
 Original scientific paper 
 
 
 
 
 
EUTROPHICATION – A NEED FOR UNDERSTANDING THE DANGERS 
OF AN OLD NEMESIS 
 
Svetislav S. Krstić*, Boris Aleksovski 
 
Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Ss Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, 
RN Macedonia 
 
e-meil: skrstic@pmf.ukim.mk 
 
 
Nutrient enrichment of aquatic environments, or eutrophication in modern terms, is a fundamental pri mordial 
planetary process that enables the proliferation of life in otherwise "sterile" ecosystems. It strongly supports the rapid 
expansion of primary producers, most of all – the algae, which initiates the formation of sequenced food chains, leading 
to life boosts in specific areas. This so-called ‘natural’ eutrophication has been a driving force for living forms through-
out the history of our planet, and may even have been depicted in the Bible. However, the development of human socie-
ty, including agriculture, industrial and technological expansion, and waste generation, has been the starting point of so-
called ‘cultural’ or accelerated eutrophication that poses numerous problems for both the environment and humans. 
Based on selected natural and manmade ec osystems in North Macedonia, this paper points out the necessity of under-
standing and combating the deleterious effect of accelerated eutrophication in all water bodies. 
 
Key words: Eutrophication; accelerated eutrophication; causes; consequences; management 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Nutrients are essential for all living organ-
isms on our planet. The formation of specific food 
chains in both aquatic and terrestrial environments 
greatly depends on energy from the Sun, nutrients, 
and favorable conditions. Recently di scovered [1], 
‘hydrothermal vents’ in almost all oceans [2] differ 
only in terms of their energy source, which comes 
from geothermal activity rather than the Sun. How-
ever, the complexity of life and food chains discov-
ered in these extreme locations is asto nishing. Both 
terrestrial and aquatic environments can become 
rich in nutrients, or eutrophic, the main difference 
being that aquatic ecosystems are more dynamic 
and express consequent changes in biota and overall 
ecosystem deterioration much more rapidly. 
Water environments remain in ecological 
equilibrium as long as favorable conditions, in-
cluding nutrients, support primary production that 
is roughly equal to decomposition processes, thus 
preventing an excess of nutrients in the system. 
The so-called ‘tot al capacity’ of an ecosystem [3] 
is defined as "a chain of parameters whose combi-
nation will guid e the course of eutrophication". 
Essential elements of ecosystem functionality, such 
as total capacity, primary production, and the de-
composition of organic ma tter, define the intensity 
of trophy and saprobity. When an ecosystem has a 
primary organic production that corresponds in the 
intensity to decomposition of the total biomass, the 
trophy is about the same as saprobity. In these sys-
tems, there is no additio nal organic load, and the 
aging process corresponds to natural eutrophica-
tion. Water ecosystems, especially freshwater ones, 
age naturally over a very long period (even span-
ning millions of years) unless a catastrophic event 
or human activity does not chan ge the essential 
elements of the ecosystem. Disturbance or the ab-
sence of any of these elements may lead to the pre-
vention of primary production and, therefore, rep-
resent the limiting factors for that particular eco-
system. However, it is more probable toda y that 
disturbances will add excess nutrient elements to 
the ecosystem, thereby altering its total capacity 
and primary production, leading to intensive eu-
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
304 
trophication or ‘accelerated eutrophication ’, which 
greatly shortens the ecosystem’s lifespan. 
Excess inputs of organic and mineral matter 
(from natural or human processes) lead to a direct 
increase in an ecosystem’s total capacity, which is 
reflected in an increase in total organic production. 
In this case, every member of the food chain, pri-
mary producers, decomposers, and consumers, in-
creases its biomass, resulting in disturbances in the 
decomposition processes that cannot compensate 
for the excessive production of matter. This pro-
cess called ‘self -purification’, or better auto -
recovery, of the ecosyste ms that combat the over-
load of nutrients is a biologically limited process 
that will never reverse the input levels prior to or-
ganic loads. Therefore, with the continual input of 
organic material, the water body cannot recover 
and experiences intensive (or accelerated) eutroph-
ication and rapid aging, typically occurring over a 
few decades. Accelerated eutrophication is already 
evident in the majority of ecosystems today, large-
ly due to adverse human impacts. As dimly stated 
[4] "In many countries, both deve loping and devel-
oped, current pathways for water use are often not 
sustainable… The world faces a worsening series 
of local and regional water quantity and quality 
problems… Water resource constraints and water 
degradation are weakening one of the resource 
bases on which human society is built". 
So, why is the accelerated eutrophication of 
freshwater ecosystems so devastating to the envi-
ronment, as well as to human and animal health? 
The continual excess input of nutrients into aquatic 
environments triggers a series of sequential re-
sponses of biota, ultimately leading to the total ex-
tinction of autochthonous flora and fauna. This 
results in an almost lifeless ecosystem dominated 
primarily by bacteria. Namely, being mixotrophic 
[5], algae, as primary producer s in waters, first re-
act to excess nutrients (usually N and P com-
pounds, but also other nutrients like Fe that are 
also important for marine ecosystems [6]) and use 
it for a rapid proliferation of cell numbers. Both 
planktonic and benthic algae respond to the newly 
enriched environment, causing their biomass to 
rapidly increase throughout the water column. The 
types of algae that predominate in the ecosystem 
depend on their overall capacity, but the general 
rule for almost all environments (except polar 
ones) is a seasonal or prolonged, permanent micro-
flora succession from chrysophytes and diatoms, 
toward green algae and, ultimately, blue -green al-
gae (Fig. 1). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Asterionella formosa (a diatom, pointed out with letter a), Volvox aureus (b) and Eudorina elegans (green algae, c) 
in plankton of the Knezevo reservoir, July 2013 (zooplanktonic Daphnia sp. also present) (photo S. Krstić). 
Eutrophication – a need for understanding the dangers of an old nemesis 
Прилози, Одд. прир. мат. биотех. науки, МАНУ, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
305 
The rapid and intensive increase of algal bio-
mass represents serious deterioration of ecological 
circumstances purely by production of excess organic 
matter in the system that will inevitably end up at the 
bottom as organic biomass subjected to an intensive 
bacterial decomposition. From this point onwards, if 
the excess nutrient supply is not stopped, freshwater 
ecosystems enter a spiral of deterioration, leading to 
murky waters (low transparency), oxygen depletion 
(especially at the bottom), extinctions of biota (main-
ly bottom-dwelling fauna and fish), and the accumu-
lation of anaerobic mud sediments that further prolif-
erate the excess nutrients in the system. 
Furthermore, there is another very important 
aspect of algal dominance in a particular ecosystem. 
Of the more than 72. 000 known algal species [7], 
only about a hundred are capable of mass prolifera-
tion and bloom formation visible at the surface of the 
water body. Some of these species, no more than a 
few dozen (although scientific evidence of new taxa 
is mounting up) are capable of producing toxins as an 
evolutionary adaptation to restrictive environmental 
conditions, including allelopathy. There are only a 
few known algal groups capable of toxin production: 
cyanobacteria (blue -green algae), dinoflagellates 
(formerly known as Pyrrophyta – fire algae), chryso-
phytes (golden algae), diatoms (silicate algae) and 
xanthophytes (yellow-green algae). The production 
of toxins in algae is still not well understood. Pro-
duced toxins surely influence other organisms, in-
cluding grazers, and thus promote the proliferation of 
toxin-producing algae [8]. Algal toxins are usually 
secondary metabolites that are toxic to other organ-
isms by chance. Their primary roles are in processes 
such as storing nitrogen reserves, biosynthesis of nu-
cleic acids, bioluminescence, structural organization 
of chromosomes, ion transport through channels, bac-
terial endosymbiosis or induction of sexual reproduc-
tion during bloom senescence [9]. The mass prolifer-
ation of toxic algae in water environments is termed 
Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs). 
All water environments are susceptible to 
massive algal proliferation and HABs. However, 
considering the importance of freshwater ecosystems 
for the environment and human ac tivities, such as 
being sources of drinking water and irrigation for 
food production, the deleterious effects of accelerated 
eutrophication are much more pronounced and life-
threatening. The sheer volume of marine environ-
ments masks the obvious trends and spatial-temporal 
impacts of eutrophication. In freshwater environ-
ments, many different algal groups become dominant 
during the eutrophication process. Filamentous ben-
thic forms, such as Cladophora, Stigeoclonium, Spi-
rogyra, or Oedogonium, increase their presence, be-
come buoyant, and appear at the surface of water 
bodies as scum. In plankton, different algal groups 
also interchange in dominance depending on the total 
capacity of the water body, usually represented by 
diatoms, green, yellow-green, golden, and fire algae. 
However, the most prominent water blooms are 
caused by blue-green algae. While any mass prolifer-
ation of algae is regarded as a nuisance and harmful 
to the water body, only a very limited number of al-
gae are considered truly harmful in freshwater envi-
ronments, such as Primnesium parvum (Haptophyta, 
formerly golden algae) and the diatom Didy-
mosphenia geminata. The real threat to freshwater 
environments comes from the massive dominance of 
blue-green algae or cyanobacteria, many of which are 
known toxin producers, and the number of these spe-
cies continually rises. 
The occurrence of blue -green algae (cyano-
bacteria) in different trophic statuses of freshwaters 
is depicted by Chorus and Welker [10] as: 
- In oligotrophic waterbodies, planktonic 
cyanobacteria are unlikely to attain cell densities 
that cause hazardous cyanotoxin concentrations. 
However, benthic or epiphytic cyanobacteria may 
be present and cover littoral sediments. 
- In mesotrophic waterbodies, cyanobacteri-
al blooms occur rarely; exceptions include met-
alimnetic accumulations of Planktothrix rubescens 
(which may be at depths of drinking-water offtakes 
or come to the surface, increasing risk of expo-
sure), detached mats of benthic cyanobacteria and 
– in large waterbodies – recruitment of cyanoba c-
teria (particularly of Dolichospermum) from low 
cell density but very large water volumes and sur-
face areas to visible scums along a downwind 
shoreline. 
- In eutrophic and particularly hypertrophic 
waterbodies, cyanobacteria occur frequently and 
abundantly, often constituting a major share of the 
total phytoplankton biomass for extended parts of 
the year. 
It is estimated that as much as 75% of all 
water ecosystems containing cyanobacteria also 
contain toxic cyanobacterial metabolites [11]. 
These secondary me tabolites, some of which are 
called cyanotoxins, have different biological ef-
fects. Cyanotoxins differ in their chemical struc-
ture and toxicity. Considering which human (ani-
mal) organ they express their toxicity to, cyanotox-
ins are divided as hepatotoxins (microcystins, 
nodularin, cylindrospermopsin), neurotoxins (sax-
itoxins, anatoxin -a, anatoxin -a(s), homoanatoxin-
a), cytotoxins (aplysiatoxin, debromoaplysiatoxin, 
lyngybatoxin, lipopolysaccharide endotoxins ) and 
skin irritants (almost all cyanotoxins) [12]. 
Cyanotoxins may cause many deleterious 
harmful effects on humans, terrestrial and aquatic 
animals, as well as the environment as a whole 
[13]. The color and odor produced by the mass 
development of cyanobacteria, along with docu-
mented poisonings of anim als (mammals, birds, 
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
306 
fish), have undoubtedly attracted human attention 
in the past. There are various written documents, 
long before the invention of the microscope, that 
clearly point out the mass proliferation of algae in 
waters. For example, the allusio n to "swamp fun-
gus" on the surface of waters is mentioned in 
Shakespeare’s drama "Venetian Merchant " [14]. 
Over time, people began to connect animal poison-
ings and different human incidents with the mass 
development of blue -green algae in freshwater en-
vironments. The oldest known record of possible 
human poisoning from cyanotoxins dates 1,000 
years ago by General Liang when soldiers died after 
drinking green water in Southern China [15]. Th e 
first mass human poisoning (5.000 –8.000 people) 
might have been recorded in Charleston (West Vir-
ginia) in 1931 when the activities for purification of 
drinking water were not effective against blue-green 
algal bloom [16]. In Australia, 149 people were 
hospitalized in 1979, while in Brazil, out of 2. 000 
cases, 88 people died when water contaminated with 
cyanotoxins was used for dialysis [17]. 
Finally, as vividly described in the Bible 
[18], even God might have used the horrors of al-
gal (cyanobacterial) blooms to punish the Egyp-
tians for their disobedience, turning the wate rs of 
the River Nile red, killing fish, and rendering the 
water unusable for people. On the other hand, 
could this have been just an episode of old Neme-
sis? Nonetheless, Mays et al. [19] argue that harm-
ful algal and bacterial blooms, linked to deforesta-
tion, soil loss, and global warming, are becoming 
increasingly frequent in lakes and rivers. They 
demonstrate that climate changes and deforestation 
can drive recurrent microbial blooms, inhibiting 
the recovery of freshwater ecosystems for hun-
dreds of millenn ia. Furthermore, fossil, sedimen-
tary, and geochemical data suggest that bloom 
events occurred following the collapse of forest 
ecosystems during the most severe mass extinction 
in Earth’s history, the end -Permian event (EPE, c. 
252.2 Ma). Microbial communi ties proliferated in 
lowland fresh and brackish water bodies, with algal 
concentrations typical of modern blooms. 
Recognizing the severity of the impact and 
dangers coming from cyanobacterial toxins, the 
World Health Organization (WHO) [20] derived a 
tolerable daily intake (TDI) value for microcystin-LR 
for human health risk assessment purposes. The TDI 
of 0.04 µg/kg bw/day was used for the calculation of 
guidance value for the maximal acceptable concen-
tration of microcystin-LR in drinking water (1 µg/L). 
It was also used in human health risk assessments for 
microcystins resulting from other exposure routes, 
such as recreational exposure, consumption of con-
taminated food, or blue-green algal food supplements 
[21]. However, microcystin-LR is not the only com-
mon structural variant of microcystin, and experts 
recommend using the guideline value for total micro-
cystins instead [22]. 
In the Republic of North Macedonia, there is 
no continuous, scientifically based, reliable moni-
toring of eutrophication in any of it s freshwater 
environments. Consequently, there is no database 
where eutrophication parameters, trends, algal 
blooms, and their impacts are recorded, including 
possible cases of adverse effects of algal toxins on 
humans, animals, and the environment. The hy dro-
biological team at the Faculty of Natural S ciences 
and Mathematics within Ss Cyril and Methodius 
University in Skopje is the only scientific group 
addressing this issue and gathering data in different 
water bodies across the country over the years. 
Based on selected natural and manmade ecosys-
tems in North Macedonia, this paper aims to pre-
sent case studies and highlight the necessity of un-
derstanding and combating the harmful effects of 
accelerated eutrophication in all water bodies, in-
cluding marine environments. 
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
 
Regular monitoring of eutrophication is rela-
tively straightforward and does not require exten-
sive expenses if conducted by experts. It involves 
regular measurements of basic nutrients, metals, 
algal biomass, algal compositi on, abundance, and 
algal toxins in a given water body. Since there is 
no regular monitoring system in place, the results 
presented in this paper are based on occasional 
efforts by the authors over the years, focusing on 
different water ecosystems that were in focus at a 
particular time. Generally, the following methods 
were used, although not for every ecosystem pre-
sented in the results. Field measurements included 
basic physicochemical parameters (temperature, 
pH, dissolved oxygen, oxygen saturation, condu c-
tivity) using a portable SensoDirect 150 multime-
ter. Measurements of basic nutrients and chloro-
phyll a were performed according to standard la-
boratory protocols (APHA, 1998) using a Lov-
ibond Tintometer® spectrophotometer. The meas-
urement of basic physicoc hemical parameters, nu-
trients, and chlorophyll a was carried out on inte-
grated water samples using a Ruttner water sam-
pler. To measure dissolved nutrients, the water 
sample was first filtered through 0.45 μm mem-
brane filters. The maximal depth was measured 
with a weighted marked line. 
The plankton material was collected using a 
plankton net (pore size 10 µm) slowly dragged us-
ing a motor boat or using vertical column mixing. 
The collected material was preserved in 4% for-
maldehyde or Lugol’s solution for furt her pro-
cessing in the laboratory (WHO, 1999). 
Eutrophication – a need for understanding the dangers of an old nemesis 
Прилози, Одд. прир. мат. биотех. науки, МАНУ, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
307 
All plankton material was analyzed by 
standard light microscopy, but for better visualiza-
tion of the mucilaginous envelope, the material 
was also stained with China Ink and analyzed in 
detail. Microphotographs were taken of both native 
materials and stained colonies with Nikon eclipse 
E800M LM with Nikon Coolpix 4500 camera. The 
identification of the species was performed using 
standard literature (Komárek and Anagnostidis 
[23], Šejnohová and Maršálek [24]) as well as the 
main report for European Microcystis morphospe-
cies (Komárek and Komárková [25]). 
Toxin analyses were performed as follows: 50 
ml of the integrated water sample was filtered in situ 
through glass-fiber filters 47 mm (GF/C) using a 
vacuum filtration device. The filtrated samples were 
transported on cold and kept frozen at –20 °C until 
the analysis day. The quantitative detection of free 
dissolved microcystins in the samples was performed 
using the Microcystins -ADDA ELISA kit from 
Abraxis (Product No. 520011) according to the man-
ufacturer’s instructions. All analyses were performed 
in triplicate. The assay was calibrated with microcys-
tin-LR and the results were expressed as microcystin-
LR equivalents. 
 
RESULTS 
 
In RN Macedonia, there are three natur al 
tectonic lakes — Ohrid, Prespa, and Dojran, and 
approximately 110 manmade reservoirs [26]. The 
most prominent and famous, Ohrid Lake, has been 
the subject of scientific research for over a century 
and continues to attract interest as a UNESCO 
World Heri tage site. Although the lake is consid-
ered to be in an oligotrophic state of pollution, as 
noted in the latest Management Plan [27], there is 
consistent evidence suggesting that the lake is ex-
periencing increased anthropogenic eutrophication 
[28, 29], especially in the littoral zone. While only 
occasional and sporadic manifestations of eutroph-
ication have been detected in the littoral zone of 
the lake, we are not considering them here, which 
does not mean that this ecosystem is not under the 
eutrophication influence as well. 
 
 
 
 
 e 
 
Figure 2. Water blooms in Prespa Lake (a) caused by massive proliferation of Dolichospermum flosaquae and D. circinale (b) 
during the summer months of 2011. The highest recorded total microcystins presence (c) in 2011 was 53 
 g·l–1. (photo S. Krstić). 
A Dolichospermum flosaquae water bloom was also detected in 2015 (d, photo B. Aleksovski). e. Core sample analyses of total N 
and P content in sediments of Prespa Lake of the last 10ka [30]. 
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
308 
Lake Prespa 
 
During the summer of 2 011, a quite visible 
vivid green water bloom was detected in Lake 
Prespa. The phytoplankton analyses disclosed a 
massive domination of Dolichospermum flosaquae 
and Dolichospermum circinale . The highest rec-
orded total microcystins presence was detected in 
August 2011, with 53 
 g·l–1 [30, 31]. The sampling 
campaign of Lake Prespa in 2015 confirmed the 
dominance of Dolichospermum flosaquae in this 
ecosystem. The overall results of several sampling 
campaigns indicated that Prespa Lake is evidently 
a Dolichospermum-type lake; the other potentially 
toxic blue-green types, such as Microcystis spp. or 
Aphanizomenon spp., were found only rarely and 
in a limited number of colonies. 
 
 
 
 
Lake Dojran 
 
Over the past 10 years, several sampling cam-
paigns (2010, 2015, 2016, 2019, 2020) have une-
quivocally shown that Lake Dojran is a typical Mi-
crocystis-type blooming eutrophic lake. In 2010, the 
plankton community revealed dominance of four 
Microcystis taxa (M. aeruginosa, M. wesenbergii, M. 
flos-aquae, M. ichthyoblabe) along with Planktolyn-
bya contorta as a subdominant species [31]. During 
2010, two significant concentration peaks of total 
microcystins were detected – one in June with con-
centrations of 288 μg ·l–1 and the other in October 
with a maximum value of 105 μg·l–1, while the total 
cyanotoxin levels were kept lower than 5 μg·l–1 in all 
of the remaining months (Fig. 3, [31]). These find-
ings suggest that Lake Dojran experiences several 
periods of very high toxin concentrations (peaks) 
throughout the year, each lasting only a few days, 
after which the ecosystem returns to a baseline mi-
crocystin level of only a few μg·l–1 [32]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Microcystins detected in three sampling sites on Dojran Lake and in sediments during 2010 
 
 
 
In 2015, the state of Lake Dojran worsened, 
with an overall dominance of even nine co -existing 
Microcystis species (M. aeruginosa, M. botrys, M. 
flos-aquae, M. ichthyoblabe, M. novacekii, M. proto-
cystis, M. smithii, M. viridis, and M. wesenbergii ) 
documented in this small lake, and with the domina-
tion of the pan - and neo-tropical species M. proto-
cystis, for the first time recorded in a European lake 
[32-33]. The values of total microcystins obtained in 
this period were in the range of 0.5–2.84 μg·l–1 [33]. 
The results of the sampling campaign in 
2020 [34] also confirmed the severe proliferation 
of Microcystis species in the phytoplankton and 
scum of Dojran Lake. Additionally, a clear domi-
nation of endogloeic Pseudanabaena species was 
detected in the mucilage of the Microcystis colo-
nies, along with well -developed filaments of sev-
eral Dolichospermum species (Fig. 4). The total 
levels of microcystins in the integrated water sam-
ple reached 1.3 
 g·l–1, while the total mean micro-
cystin levels in the scum material were assessed as 
22.8 ± 2.8 µg· l–1 and the overall cell -bound MCs 
concentration was assessed as 67.1 ± 1.9 µg/g dry 
phytoplankton biomass. (Fig. 5, [34]). The mud of 
Dojran Lake was very rich in microcystin concen-
tration – 172.4 ± 2.8 µg/g dry mud. 
 
 
Eutrophication – a need for understanding the dangers of an old nemesis 
Прилози, Одд. прир. мат. биотех. науки, МАНУ, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
309 
 
 
Figure 4. Visible massive proliferation of cyanobacteria and primary constituents of the scum in Dojran Lake in 2020 [31]. 
(photo S. Krstić and B. Aleksovski) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Total and dissolved microcystin presence in waters and sediments of Dojran Lake in 2020 [31]. 
 
 
Cases of water blooms in North Macedonia 
reservoirs 
 
Between 2005 and 2011, several cases of 
severe water b loom formation were detected in 
reservoirs across North Macedonia. In 2005, a 
Planktothrix rubescens bloom was documented in 
the "Strezevo" reservoir near Bitola (Fig. 6). Later, 
in 2008, this cyanobacterium was found in the wa-
ter bloom of the "Tikves" and "Ratevsko" reser-
voirs, resulting in a large-scale fish kill [31]. 
During multiple investigations, the "Tikves" 
reservoir (Fig. 7) was predominantly observed to 
exhibit a reddish algal bloom, although intermittent 
occurrences of a dark -green bloom were als o doc-
umented. The primary cyanobacterial species iden-
tified across all samples were Planktothrix ru-
bescens and Planktothrix agardhii [31], with the 
species identified based on the bloom coloration. 
Both species are well -known for their toxin -
producing capa bilities. Consequently, the analyti-
cal results revealed the presence of microcystins in 
both the water column and the sediment, with con-
centrations reaching a peak of 53 
 g·l–1 and 9 
 g·g–1, 
respectively [31]. Other algal taxa were found to 
be relatively sparse, with minimal and infrequent 
occurrences. As expected, these conditions led to a 
large-scale fish mortality event in the cage farms 
located in the "Tikves" reservoir in August 2011. 
 
 
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
310 
 
 
Figure 6. Planktothrix rubescens red bloom in “Strezevo” reservoir Bitola in 2005. (photo S. Krstić) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Planktothrix rubescens red bloom in “Tikves” reservoir in 2008 and consequent fish kill in 2011 
(small picture insert floating cage for fish farming) (photo S. Krstić) 
 
 
The drinking water reservoir of the Ratevska 
River in Berovo (Fig. 8) has consistently been 
associated with red blooms on the ice, primarily 
caused by Planktothrix rubescens, during the winter 
months over the past decade. So far, this remote and 
small ecosystem has been sampled during the 
winters of 2008 and 2011, with the aim of assessing 
microcystin concentrations in the water [31]. 
Surprisingly, despite the high densities of algal cells 
and their rapid lysis within the ice matrix, only very 
low concentrations of microcystins (around 1 µg·l⁻¹) 
were detected in the water [31]. Nevertheless, the 
presence of toxins was confirmed in this reservoir, 
which, like many others in North Macedonia, 
requires increased scrutiny and management 
attention in the near future. 
 
Eutrophication – a need for understanding the dangers of an old nemesis 
Прилози, Одд. прир. мат. биотех. науки, МАНУ, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
311 
 
 
Figure 8. Planktothrix rubescens bloom in "Ratevska Reka" reservoir Berovo in 2008. (photo S. Krstić) 
 
 
The Mantovo Reservoir was analyzed during 
a sampling campaign in 2021. According to the 
local citizens, the ecological condition of the reser-
voir has suffered a sudden deteriorat ion since 
2018, characterized by strong turbidity and green-
ish water, along with the appearance of foam and 
massive cyanobacterial scrums. The phytoplankton 
analysis conducted in 2021 revealed a massive wa-
ter bloom of Aphanizomenon klebahnii as the dom-
inant species in the reservoir. Aphanizomenon 
klebahnii in the plankton was primarily represented 
in a dense mass of trichomes aggregated in bun-
dles; such straightforward bundles (Fig. 9) from 
100 μm to 1 mm in size (sometimes macroscopi-
cally) dominated in each of the five analyzed 
measuring points. Part of the material in the fifth 
measurement site (pond 3 "Bate Wase") was de-
tected in the final stage of decomposition, in the 
form of a water bloom of individual trichomes that 
also dominated the phytoplankton. The total mi-
crocystin concentration peaked 9 μg·l–1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Aphanizomenon klebahnii bloom in "Mantovo“ reservoir in 2021. 
(photo S. Krstić and B. Aleksovski) 
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
312 
DISCUSSION 
 
It is quite clear that eutrophication is a uni-
versal and widespread phenomenon that may have 
contributed to the fundamentals of life on our plan-
et. Its basic principles are simple, based on food 
availability and utilization, wh ich leads to exces-
sive growth of algae as primary producers. This 
triggers a whole range of changes in the ecosys-
tems, eventually (if persistent and long -lasting) 
leading to the destruction of principal freshwater 
ecosystems. On the other hand, excess of n utrients 
and consequent algal blooms in marine environ-
ments is a starting point for ‘boom of life’ in re-
stricted areas where whole food chain is formed as 
a consequence; when the circumstances change, 
the whole food chain disappears and the system 
goes back to ‘marine dessert’. 
Naturally, 'accelerated eutrophication' is a 
random and occasional process caused by signifi-
cant natural catastrophes, such as earthquakes or 
volcanoes, whose effects dissipate over time without 
any traces. Unfortunately, anthropogen ic activities, 
including intensive pollution, wastewater discharge, 
and forced environmental changes, lead to the pro-
longed or permanent input of nutrients into aquatic 
environments, causing their long-term deterioration. 
Prolonged input of nutrients basic ally changes the 
‘total capacity’ of the ecosystem accumulating ex-
cess of organic and inorganic chemicals in the sys-
tem, thus creating a pool for further increase of 
bloom events and therefore a total degeneration of 
the ecosystem. Given enough time, this process 
could also affect the oceans on our planet. 
As might be elucidated from Figure 2 for 
Lake Prespa, humans started to change the natural 
environment approximately 1,000 years ago, pos-
sibly through the deforestation of specific areas, 
which led to acc elerated leaching of nutrients 
(mainly phosphorus) into the water environment. 
Early human influence, even before the industrial 
era, has been recorded in very remote environ-
ments, such as high -altitude lakes in the Nepal 
Himalayas [35], indicating that hu man impact on 
pristine ecosystems has become a global phenome-
non. Since then, and especially after the modern 
industrial and agricultural revolutions, man has 
produced so many pollutants in vast quantities that 
almost all freshwater environments are now un der 
severe stress [4]. 
In the case of North Macedonia, data sug-
gests that no watercourse or stagnant water ecosys-
tem is deprived of negative human impact. Regard-
ing rivers, there are numerous documented cases of 
deteriorated environments [36] that transpor t im-
mense amounts of nutrients and pollutants to 
downstream recipients, as there are no functional 
wastewater treatment plants. Where wastewater 
treatment plants are installed, they are either not func-
tioning properly or not functioning at all. It is, there-
fore, not surprising that almost all lentic water bodies 
in the country experience intensive eutrophication. 
Water blooms by cyanobacteria in natural lakes are 
recurrent and have become more intense over the 
years. Lake Prespa is a Dolichospermum type of lake, 
while Lake Dojran is dominated by Microcystis; both 
lakes have been found to contain cyanotoxins. 
On the other hand, the manmade reservoirs 
usually host Planktothrix rubescens as the domi-
nant cyanobacteria. Toxic cyanobacteria, such as 
Planktothrix rubescens, came to dominate temper-
ate lakes in the middle to late 20th century [37]. P. 
rubescens can produce hepatotoxins (micro-
cystins), as well as neurotoxins (anatoxin -a), pos-
ing a risk to human and animal health [38]. These 
risks negatively affect lake ecosystem services 
such as drinking water and recreation [39]. In some 
cases, the decay and decomposition of cyanobacte-
rial blooms have led to anoxic conditions and fish 
kills [40] (figure 6). In several European, lakes 
such as Mondsee (Austria), Bourget (France), Gar-
da (Italy), Zurich and Hallwil (Switzerland), this 
cyanobacterium remained even after extreme 
phosphorus reduction [38]. 
Evidently, it is final time that human society 
starts to take care of the environment much more 
profoundly than so far. O nce the deterioration of 
the water ecosystems is initiated, enormous efforts 
are needed to restore the natural environment. In 
the case of RN Macedonia (most likely as in the 
rest of the modern society), it is ultimately im-
portant to start implementing the EU (Water Frame 
Directive) and domestic legislation and promote 
the ‘good status’ of its waters prior to making any 
negative decisions. Some of these negative deci-
sions include: the construction and full operation 
of a domestic wastewater collector system prior to 
postulating and building a wastewater treatment 
plant; not taking care of the efficiency of existing 
wastewater treatment plants; applying not sustain-
able agricultural practices; lack of permanent and 
scientifically based monitoring system; promo ting 
the ‘blooming’ lakes (like Lake Dojran) as healing 
environment, etc. Otherwise, in light of global cli-
mate change, we are facing a very grim future 
where the majority of surface waters will become 
useless and harmful to any human activity. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Colín-García, "Hydrothermal vents and prebi-
otic chemistry: a review" , Boletín de la Sociedad 
Geológica Mexicana, 68, (3) (2016), pp. 599 –
620. 
Eutrophication – a need for understanding the dangers of an old nemesis 
Прилози, Одд. прир. мат. биотех. науки, МАНУ, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
313 
[2] E. Beaulieu, T. Baker, R. German, A. Ma ffei, An 
authoritative global database for active submarine 
hydrothermal vent fields, Geochemistry, Geophys-
ics, Geosystems, 14, (11) (2013) , pp. 4892–4905. 
 
[3] Z. Svirčev, S. Krstić, T. Važić, The philosophy 
and applicability of ecoremediations for the pro-
tection of water ecosystems, Acta geographica 
Slovenica, 54, 1 (2014), pp. 179–188. 
 
[4] D. Meadows, J. Randers, Limits to growth-the 30-
year update, Chelsea Green Publishing Company, 
Vermont, 2014. 
 
[5] S. Krstić, Introduction to phycology , "Ss. Cyril 
and Methodius " University, Republic of North 
Macedonia, 2021. 
 
[6] V. Bourne, A new understanding of iron in the 
open ocean may help provide clues to future cli-
mate change, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, 
Virginia, 2023. 
 
[7] M. Guiry, "How Many Species of Algae Are 
There?", Journal of Phycology, 48 (5) (2012), pp. 
1057–1063. 
 
[8] C. Legrand, K. Rengefors, G. O. Fistarol, E. Graneli, 
Allelopathy in phytoplankton –biochemical, eco-
logical and evolutionary aspects, Phycologia, 42 
(2003), pp. 406–419. 
 
[9] A. D. Cembella, Chemical ecology of eukaryotic 
microalgae in marine ecosystems, Phycologia, 42 
(2003), pp. 420–44. 
 
[10] I. Chorus, M. Welker, Toxic cyanobacteria in 
water – a guide for public health consequences, 
monitoring and management, Second edition, 
CRC Press London, 2021. 
 
[11] I. Chorus, Introduction: Cyanotoxins – research 
for environmental safety and huma n health. In: 
Chorus I, editor. Cyanotoxins – Occurrence, 
Causes, Consequences , Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 
2001. 
 
[12] G. A. Codd, J. Lindsay, F. Young, L. Morrison, S. 
Metcalf, Cyanobacterial Toxins. In: Huisman J., 
Matthijs H., Visser P., editors. Harmful Cyano-
bacteria, Springer-Verlag, 2005. 
 
[13] E. M. L. Janssen, Cyanobacterial peptides beyond 
microcystins - A review on co -occurrence, toxici-
ty, and c hallenges for risk assessment, Water Re-
search, 151 (2019), pp. 488–499. 
 
[14] G. Fogg, W. Stewart, P. Fay, A. Walsby, Cyano-
phytes: The Blue -Green Algae , Academic Press, 
New York, 1973. 
 
[15] I. Chorus, J. Bartram, (eds), Toxic cyanobacteria 
in water: a gui de to their public health conse-
quences, monitoring and management , E&FN 
Spon on Behalf of WHO, London, 1999. 
 
[16] A. Miller, E. Tisdale, Epidemic of intestinal dis-
orders in Charleston, West Virginia occurring 
simultaneously with unprecedented water supply 
conditions, American Journal of Public Health 
Research, 21 (1931), pp. 198–200. 
 
[17] J. S. Metcalf, G. A. Codd, Cyanobacterial toxins 
(cyanotoxins) in water, Foundation for Water Res 
Allen House, The Listons, Liston Road, Marlow , 
Bucks SL 7 1FD, U.K., 2004. 
 
[18] Exodus 7:14 -25 – Thus says the Lord, “By this 
you shall know that I am the Lord: behold, with 
the staff that is in my hand I will strike the water 
that is in the Nile, and it shall turn into blood. The 
fish in the Nile shall die, and the Nile w ill stink, 
and the Egyptians will grow weary of drinking 
water from the Nile.” 
 
[19] C. Mays, S. McLoughlin, F. Tracy, C. Fileding, S. 
Slater, V. Vajda, "Lethal microbial blooms de-
layed f reshwater ecosystem recovery following 
the end-Permian extinction", Nature Communica-
tions, 12 (5511) (2021) pp. 5511. 
 
[20] World Health Organization (WHO). Gui delines 
for drinking water quality, 2 nd ed., Addendum to 
Vol. 2. Geneva: WHO, 1998. 
 
[21] L. Blaha, L, P. Babica, B. Marshalek, Toxins pro-
duced in cyanobacterial water blooms – toxicity 
and risks, Interdisciplinary Toxicology , 2(2) 
(2009), pp. 36–41. 
 
[22] I. Chorus, Editorial and summary. In: I. Chorus, 
editor. Current approaches to cyanotoxin risk as-
sessment, risk management and regulations in dif-
ferent countries, Berlin: Federal Environmental 
Agency (Umweltbundesamt), (2005), pp. 1–8. 
 
[23] J. Komárek, K. Anagnostidis, Cyanoprokaryota 1. 
Teil: Chroococcales, p. 224 -236. In: H. Ettl, G. 
Gartner, H. Heynig & D. Mollenhauer (eds.), 
Süsswasserflora von Mitteleuropa , 19/1, Gustav 
Fischer, Jena-Stuttgart-Lübeck-Ulm. 1998. 
 
[24] L. Šejnohová, B. Maršálek, Microcystis, In: Ecol-
ogy of cyanobacteria II: their diversity in space 
and time. Whitton, B. A. (eds.), Springer Science 
& Business Media B.V., London, 2012, pp. 195 –
228. 
 
[25] J. Komárek, J. Komárkova, Review of European 
Microcystis-morphospecies (Cyanopro karyotes) 
from nature, Czech Phycology, 2 (2002), pp. 1–24. 
 
[26] Biodiversity strategy and action plan of the Re-
public of Macedonia, MOEPP, 143 pp., 2003. 
 
[27] Lake Ohrid watershed management plan, 
MOEPP, 2020. 
 
[28] S. Schneider et al., Eutrophication impacts littoral 
biota in Lake Ohrid while water phosphorus con-
centrations are low, Limnologica, 44, (2014), pp. 
90–97. 
 
[29] J. Lorenschat et al., Recent anthropogenic impact 
in ancient Lake Ohrid (Macedonia/Albania): a 
palaeolimnological approach, Journal of Palelim-
nology, 52 (2014), pp. 139–154. 
 
[30] S. Krsti ć, Environmental changes in lakes catch-
ments as a trigger for rapid eutrophication – a 
Prespa Lake case study. In: T. Piancentini, E. 
Miccadei (Eds.) Studies of Applied and Environ-
mental Geomorphology, “InTech” open access 
publisher, Rijeka, Croatia, 63–118, 2012. 
 
S. S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski 
Contributions, Sec. Nat. Math. Biotech. Sci., MASA, 44 (1–2), 303–314 (2023) 
314 
[31] M. Blinkova, N. Zdravevski, S. Krstić, Blue-green 
Algae, the Janus of Nature. Conference: BAL-
WOIS-International Conference on Water, Cli-
mate and Environment, Ohrid, May 2012. 
 
[32] S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski, Dominance of Micro-
cystis spp. in L ake Dojran – a consequence of 30 
years of accelerated eutrophication, Botanica Ser-
bica, 40 (2) (2016), pp. 119–128. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.162208 
 
[33] S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski, J. Komáre k, Rare occur-
rence of nine Microcystis species (Chroococcales, 
Cyanobacteria) in a single lake (Lake Dojran, 
FYR Macedonia). Advances in Oceanography 
and Limnology, 8 (1) (2017), pp. 4–21. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.4081/aiol.2017.6236 
 
[34] S. Krstić, B. Aleksovski, V. Slavevska-Stamenković, 
J. Hinić, I. Šoreva, T. Conevski, Final report on 
Dojran Lake eutrophication status, Report for the 
project "Assessment of an Endemic Freshwater 
Snail in Dojran Lake – Population Status, Threats 
and Conse rvation Measures, North Macedonia " 
CEPF-110711, (2021), pp. 35. 
 
[35] S. Krstić, W. Zech, I. Obreht, Z. Svirčev, S. Mar-
ković, Late Quaternary environmental changes in 
Helambu Himal, Central Nepal, recorded in the 
diatom flora assemblage composition and ge o-
chemistry of Lake Panch Pokhari, Journal of 
Paleolimnology, 47 (2012), pp. 113–124. 
[36] S. Krstić, Surface waters water quality in Skopje 
region determined via biological indicators, Con-
ference "Pollution of the cities in the Republic of 
Macedonia: what are the solutions? ", Macedoni-
an Academy of Science and arts, Book of ab-
stracts, Skopje, 2019. 
 
[37] E. Suarez, L. Ventura, A. Stönckli, C. Ordoñez, 
M. Thomas, B. Ibelings, D. McGinnis, The emer-
gence and dominance of Planktothrix rubescens 
as an hypolimnetic cyanobacterium in response to 
re-oligotrophication of a deep peri -alpine lake, 
Limnology and Oceanography , 68 (2023), pp. 
1346–1359. 
 
[38] R. Kurmayer and M. Gumpenberger, Diversity of 
microcystin genotypes among populations of the 
filamentous cyanobacteria Planktothrix rubescens 
and Planktothrix agardhii , Molecular Ecolology , 
15 (2006), pp. 3849–3861. 
 
[39] B. W. Ibelings, R. Kurmayer, S. M. F. O. Azeve-
do, S. A. Wood, I. Chorus, M. Welker, Toxic Cy-
anobacteria in Water, CRC Press, 2021, pp. 213 –
294. 
 
[40] J. Huisman, G. A. Codd, H. W. Paerl, B. W. I bel-
ings, J. M. H. Verspagen, P. M. Visser. Cyano-
bacterial blooms, Nature Reviews Microbiology , 
16 (2018), pp. 471–483. 
 
 
ЕУТРОФИКАЦИЈА – ПОТРЕБА ОД РАЗБИРАЊЕ НА ОПАСНОСТА ОД СТАРИОТ НЕПРИЈАТЕЛ 
 
Светислав С. Крстиќ, Борис Алексовски 
 
Природно-математички факултет, 
Универзитет „Св. Кирил и Методиј“ во Скопје, РС Македонија 
 
 
Збогатувањето со хранливи материи на водните среди ни, или еутрофикацијата во современи термини, е 
фундаментален исконски планетарен процес кој овозможува пролиферација на животот во инаку „стерилни“ 
екосистеми. Таа силно го поддржува брзото ширење на примарните продуценти, пред сè алг ите, кои иницираат 
формирање супсеквентни синџири на исхрана, што доведува до поттикнување на животот во одредени области. 
Оваа таканаречена „природна“ еутрофикација била движечка сила за живите форми н из историјата на нашата 
планета и можеби била прикажана дури и во Библијата. Сепак, развојот на човечкото општество, вклучително и 
земјоделството, индустриската и технолошката експанзија и создавањето отпад, беше п очетна точка на 
таканаречената културна или забрзана еутрофикација , што претставува бројни проблеми и за животната 
средина и за луѓето. Врз основа на избрани природни и вештачки екосистеми во Република Северна 
Македонија, овој труд укажува на неопходноста од разбирање и борба против штетниот ефект од забрзаната 
еутрофикација на секое водно тело. 
 
Клучни зборови: еутрофикација; забрзана еутрофикација; причини; последици; управување