A search area of 1km radius from the Site has been established, hereafter referred to as the 'study area'. This is considered to be proportionate to the scale and nature of the proposed works, the primarily rural nature of the Site, and to allow a firm understanding of the archaeological background of the Site. All designated and non-designated heritage assets within this area have been considered for their potential to be impacted by the proposed works. This historic environment desk-based assessment (DBA) has been prepared by Mott MacDonald on behalf of Mott MacDonald Bentley (MMB) for Severn Trent Water Ltd (hereafter 'Severn Trent'). It assesses the impact of works (henceforth 'the Site') and outlines recommendations relating to the historic environment within Leintwardine Wastewater Treatment Works (WwTW), in advance of proposed additions to the facility. These works are anticipated to take place under permitted development. There is limited evidence for the inhabitation of the area before the Roman period, however there is extensive evidence of Roman settlement at Leintwardine and surrounding it.. The settlement of Bravinium (scheduled monument) was established between 60 and 65 AD, on the location of the present village of Leintwardine, originally founded primarily to provide services to the close by Jay Lane fort (scheduled monument) and the importance of its location along Watling Street West (non-designated assets). Archaeological finds suggest the settlement was occupied continuously until at least the end of the Roman occupation of Britain in 410 AD and may have been occupied continually to the present day. The Site is not within the known boundary of the Roman settlement but is less than 300m from the Scheduled area which captures this activity, and most of the centre of the village. The majority of the buildings in Leintwardine are post-medieval and modern, however the Grade I listed Church of St Mary Magdalene dates to the 12th century. Archaeological evidence, including ridge and furrow recorded nearby, suggests the area now occupied by the WwTW was farmed since at least the medieval period to support the settlement. The historic settlement core of Leintwardine is a conservation area, which captures an additional 15 grade II listed buildings, all post-medieval residential properties. This conservation area also captures the majority of the 33 non-designated buildings identified in the HER. There are a further 4 listed buildings within 1km of the site, in the hamlets of Whitton and Kinton to the north-east of the site. There are 83 non-designated assets recorded by the HER within 1km of the Site, however none are recorded within the Site boundary. The Site was first developed during the late 1960s and 1970s with the construction of the existing WwTW. This development has disturbed much of the centre of the site, however there are several areas within the boundary of the works which have potential to contain archaeological remains i