A national-scale vegetation multimetric index (VMMI)
as an indicator of wetland condition
across the conterminous United States
Teresa K. Magee & Karen A. Blocksom &
M. Siobhan Fennessy
Received: 18 October 2016 / Accepted: 28 April 2017
# The Author(s) 2019
Abstract In 2011, the US Environmental Protection
Agency and its partners conducted the first National
Wetland Condition Assessment at the continental-scale
of the conterminous United States. A probability design
for site selection was used to allow an unbiased assess-
ment of wetland condition. We developed a vegetation
multimetric index (VMMI) as a parsimonious biological
indicator of ecological condition applicable to diverse
wetland types at national and regional scales. V egetation
data (species presence and cover) were collected from
1138 sites that represented seven broad estuarine inter-
tidal and inland wetland types. Using field collected data
and plant species trait information, we developed 405
candidate metrics with potential for distinguishing least
disturbed (reference) from most disturbed sites. Thirty-
five of the metrics passed range, repeatability, and re-
sponsiveness screens and were considered as potential
component metrics for the VMMI. A permutation ap-
proach was used to calculate thousands of randomly
constructed potential national-scale VMMIs with 4, 6,
8, or 10 metrics. The best performing VMMI was iden-
tified based on limited redundancy among constituent
metrics, sensitivity, repeatability, and precision. This
final VMMI had four broadly applicable metrics (floris-
tic quality index, relative importance of native species,
richness of disturbance-tolerant species, and relative
cover of native monocots). VMMI values and weights
from the survey design for probability sites ( n =9 6 7 )
were used to estimate wetland area in good, fair, and
poor condition, nationally and for each of 10 ecoregion
by wetland type reporting groups. Strengths and limita-
tions of the national VMMI for describing ecological
condition are highlighted.
Keywords V egetation multimetric index (VMMI).
Ecological condition. National Wetland Condition
Assessment. Floristic quality. Wetland monitoring.
Permutation methods
Introduction
The National Wetland Condition Assessment (NWCA)
(USEP A2016m) provided an unprecedented opportuni-
ty to characterize the quality of wetlands at a continen-
tal-scale. The 2011 NWCA was conducted by the US
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and its
partners (states, tribes, other federal agencies, universi-
ties, and other organizations), and represents the first
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7324-4
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Monitoring
Wetlands on a Continental Scale: The T echnical Basis for the
National Wetland Condition Assessment.
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this
article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7324-4) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
T. K. Magee ( *) : K. A. Blocksom
Office Research and Development, National Health and
Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Western Ecology
Division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35th
Street, Corvallis 97333 OR, USA
e-mail: magee.teresa@epa.gov
M. S. Fennessy
Biology Department, Kenyon College, Gambier, OH, USA
assessment of wetland condition that spans the conter-
minous United States (US). Primary goals of the NWCA
were to evaluate the ecological condition of wetlands in
the US (this paper; Kentula and Paulsen 2019) and
identify stressors that might affect condition (Herlihy
et al. 2019b, c; Lomnicky et al.2019; Magee et al. 2019;
Nahlik et al. 2019). The survey was designed to assess
the condition of broad groups or subpopulations of
wetlands at national or regional scales, rather than the
condition of individual wetlands or wetlands across
individual states (Olsen et al. 2019). The NWCA is the
fourth in a series of National Aquatic Resource Surveys
(NARS), with previous assessments focusing on rivers
and streams, lakes and reservoirs, and near coastal areas
(e.g., USEP A2006, 2009, 2015, 2016l).
All NARS employ a probability design for site selec-
tion, which permits inference to national and regional
scales (Stevens and Olsen 2004; Olsen and Peck 2008;
Olsen et al. 2019). Ecological condition is estimated
using biological indicators, typically multimetric indices
(MMI) based on the combination of a few easily mea-
sured and interpreted metrics that describe different
attributes of a particular biotic assemblage (e.g.,
USEPA 2006; Stoddard et al. 2008;U S E P A2009).
These indices vary with human-mediated disturbance
(hereafter, disturbance), reflecting departure from refer-
ence expectations that are typically defined based on the
least disturbed sites within a study area (Stoddard et al.
2006; Herlihy et al. 2008). Indices of Biotic Integrity
(IBIs) are similar to MMIs, but are often constructed
using biology-driven expert judgment for metric selec-
tion (e.g., Karr 1991), whereas MMIs are based on a
more data-driven approach for selecting component
metrics (e.g., Stoddard et al. 2008). However, for wet-
lands, the term IBI has often been applied to both the
traditional IBI and the more objective MMI approaches.
MMIs and IBIs have been widely used as cost-
effective indicators of biological condition in various
aquatic ecosystems (Karr 1991; Karr and Chu 1997;
Jackson et al. 2000;D a l ea n dB e y e l e r2001;S t o d d a r d
et al. 2008) and have been developed for diverse biotic
assemblages (e.g., fish and amphibians (Hughes et al.
2004; Whittier et al. 2007; Micacchion et al. 2015),
aquatic macroinvertebrates (Herlihy et al. 2005), algae
(Fetscher et al. 2014), birds (Bryce and Hughes 2002;
Bryce 2006), mosses (Stapanian et al. 20 16), riparian
vegetation (Ferreira et al. 2005;A g u i a re ta l .2009), and
wetland vegetation (Mack and Kentula 2010)). Neither
MMIs nor IBIs are intended as comprehensive
descriptors of all components of ecological condition,
or even all aspects of the particular biotic assemblage on
which they are based, but they have proven to illustrate
clear and reliable trends in condition across diverse
sample populations.
For the 2011 NWCA, our goal was to develop a MMI
based on vascular vegetation (VMMI) as a biological
indicator of wetland condition. V ascular plant species
represent diverse adaptations, ecological tolerances, and
life history strategies, and they integrate environmental
factors, species interactions, and disturbance. Many dis-
turbances are reflected in shifts in the presence or abun-
dance of particular plant species (Magee and Kentula
2005; Johnston et al. 2008), plant functional or trait
groups (Lopez and Fennessy 2002; Quétier et al. 2007),
plant assemblages (Galatowitsch et al.1999; Magee et al.
1999;D e K e y s e re ta l .2009; Johnston et al. 2009), or
vegetation structural elements (Mack2007), making veg-
etation a powerful indicator of wetland condition (Mack
and Kentula 2010). Existing VMMIs or VIBIs have
proven useful for monitoring condition and prioritizing
conservation or management actions for specific wetland
types at local or regional scales within the United States
and elsewhere (e.g., DeKeyser et al. 2003; Miller et al.
2006; Reiss 2006; Mack 2007; Hargiss et al. 2008;
Rothrock et al. 2008; Lemly and Rocchio 2009;M a c k
2009; V eselka et al.2010; Euliss and Mushet2011; Genet
2012; Rooney and Bayley 2012; Deimeke et al. 2013;
Wilson et al. 2013; Hernandez et al. 2015; Savage et al.
2015; Jones et al. 2016; Miller et al. 2016).
Our challenge was to produce one national-scale
VMMI with applicability to diverse wetland types
across the conterminous US that could provide a con-
sistent approach to evaluating wetland quality across
very large scales. Ideally, a national-scale VMMI should
respond negatively to disturbance and be robust enough
to represent condition in different wetland types and
regions across the continent. Criteria for developing
and choosing an effective VMMI for the NWCA were
that it should (1) reflect condition relative to vegetation
at least disturbed sites; (2) be parsimonious, i.e., based
on the smallest number of easy-to-measure vegetation
metrics that satisfactorily represent condition; and (3)
account for biotic variability related to natural environ-
mental gradients or to regional differences in least dis-
turbed condition. A common procedure for constructing
VMMIs parallels approaches for MMI development
used by NARS (Stoddard et al. 2008). First, many
indi
vidual candidate metrics of vegetation condition
322 Page 2 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
are screened based on several criteria (e.g., range, re-
peatability, responsiveness, and redundancy). Next, a
suite of the most effective metrics is combined into a
single VMMI scaled on a continuous range of 0 to 100.
Finally, thresholds for observed VMMI values are set to
connote good, fair, and poor wetland condition based on
the distribution of VMMI values among independently
identified least disturbed sites. We used an adaptation of
this general approach (sensu V an Sickle2010)i nd e v e l -
oping the NWCA VMMI.
In this paper, we describe our methods for (1) devel-
oping a national-scale VMMI and (2) setting VMMI
thresholds for categories of condition (good, fair, and
poor) for 10 ecoregion by wetland type reporting groups
that together encompass the continental US. Thresholds
for condition categories are set within reporting groups to
represent natural differences in the VMMI that may be
related to attributes of ecoregions or wetland types. We
apply the final wetland VMMI to the vegetation data
collected in the 2011 NWCA to obtain baseline estimates
of wetland area currently in good, fair, and poor conditions
across the conterminous US and for subpopulations based
on the 10 reporting groups. Finally, we discuss some of
the strengths and limitations of the VMMI as an indicator
of wetland condition and next steps for moving forward in
the next iterations of the NWCA.
Methods
NWCA target population and survey design
Wetlands were defined, for the NWCA, as lands transi-
tional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the
water table is frequently at ornear the surface or the land is
covered by shallow water (Cowardin et al.1979;U S E P A
2016m). The jurisdictional status of wetlands under state
or federal regulatory programs was not considered in this
definition. The NWCA target wetland population includ-
ed seven broad wetland types of the conterminous US
(Table1), which encompassed tidal and nontidal systems
with rooted vegetation and, when present, open water less
t h a n1md e e p( U S E P A2011a,2016m).
The NWCA survey design is detailed in Olsen et al.
(2019) and summarized here. Sites were selected from the
US Fish & Wildlife Service’s (USFWS) National Wetland
Status and Trends (S&T) digital sample frame for wetlands
(Dahl and Bergeson 2009;D a h l2011) using a spatially
balanced, unequal probability, Generalized Random
Tessellation Stratified (GRTS) design for an area resource
(Stevens and Olsen2004, Olsen et al. 2012). The NWCA
target population represented a major subset of the wetland
categories included in the S&T sample frame, but excluded
S&T categories that typically lack vegetation or routinely
occur in deep water (e.g., Marine Intertidal or Subtidal,
Estuarine Intertidal Unconsolidated Shore or Aquatic Bed)
(USEPA 2016m, 2016n). Key elements of the survey
design were (1) stratification by state with sites proportion-
ally allocated by area of NWCA wetland types, (2) a
minimum of eight sites per state, and (3) sufficient sample
size for reporting on wetland condition nationally and
within various subpopulations. Each selected sample point
(i.e., coordinates of site location) received a weight that
reflected the acres of wetland in the target population
represented by that point (Olsen et al. 2019). Sample-
weights were used to estimate wetland area (Diaz-Ramos
et al. 1996) across the nation, regionally, or by wetland
type with a known margin of error based on a local
neighborhood variance estimate (Stevens and Olsen
2003). Site selection, weight assignment, and wetland area
estimation were completed using the R statistical software
(R Core Team 2015)a n dt h e Bspsurvey^ R contributed
package (Kincaid and Olsen2016).
Results from the survey design estimated the area of
th
e NWCA target population across the conterminous US,
in 2011, at 38.4 ± 2.51 million hectares (Olsen et al.2019).
Approximately 1/3 of this area was represented by sites
that could not be sampled due to denial of access by land
owners (n = 429), inaccessibility (n = 126; safety concerns
or remote location), or other constraints (n = 122; e.g., too
near another sampling point, crossing hydrogeomorphic
boundaries, sampling area too small). Unassessed sites
cannot be assumed to be randomly distributed; conse-
quently, results of the 2011 NWCA could not be extrap-
olated to this portion of target population (USEPA2016n).
During the 2011 field season, 967 probability sites were
sampled, and these 967 sites represent the inference or
sampled population to which results of this study are
applicable, an estimated 25.15 ± 2.27 million hectares of
wetlands (Olsen et al.2019).
In addition to the 967 probability sites from the
NWCA design, another 171 sites were selected using
non-NWCA design approaches. In an effort to supple-
ment the number of least disturbed sites that might be
observed in the probability sample, 150 handpicked
sites that passed a series of landscape-level or best
professional judgment screens were sampled to try to
identify potentially high quality reference sites (but, see
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 3 of 28 322
Herlihy et al. 2019a). Finally, 21 other sites were sam-
pled as part of the NWCA for various state-level studies
(USEP A2016n). All 1138 sampled sites were evaluated
using quantitative screening criteria to determine distur-
bance status as least (reference), intermediate, or most
disturbed (see section BReference expectations and dis-
turbance categories^).
In this study, all 1138 sampled sites (Fig. 1, see also
Online Resource 1—gray scale version of map) were
used in VMMI development; however, estimates of
wetland area with particular characteristics (e.g., condi-
tion category, ecoregion, wetland type) were based only
on the 967 probability sites. Among probability sites, 96
were identified as part of the survey design for repeat
sampling during the field season (revisit sites) to allow
assessment of within-year sampling variability. A subset
of NWCA site information data (USEP A 2016f;s i t e
identifiers, location, sample-weights, and status within
various classifications (e.g., ecoregions, wetland types))
was used to support analyses presented in this paper.
Natural variation and reporting groups
At the scale of the conterminous United States, natural
variation in plant species composition and
environmental conditions related to ecoregion and wet-
land type has implications for identifying reference sites
and setting expectations for biotic condition. In large-
scale condition assessments, ecoregional or typological
classifications or modeling approaches have often been
employed to adjust for this variation (e.g., Stoddard
2004;S t o d d a r de ta l .2006, 2008; Herlihy et al. 2008;
Pont et al. 2009; Hawkins et al. 2010;M i n n e s o t a
Pollution Control Agency 2015; Jones et al. 2016). For
t h eN W C A ,ac l a s s i f i c a t i o nh i e r a r c h yw a sd e v e l o p e dt o
(1) help account for continental-scale differences in
wetland vegetation and environmental factors and (2)
define groups that maximize within-class similarity and
maintain sufficient sample size for characterizing
reference expectations and evaluating ecological
condition (Herlihy et al. 2019a). This classification
was informed by vegetation patterns determined by
species composition, and defines 10 ecoregion × wet-
land type groups (hereafter reporting groups (Table 2))
based on combinations of the four aggregated
ecoregions (Fig. 1) and four aggregated wetland types
(encompassing the seven NWCA wetland types of the
target population, Table 1). The aggregated wetland
types include estuarine herbaceous (EH) and woody
(EW) wetlands, and inland (palustrine, shallow riverine,
Ta bl e 1 Definition of NWCA target population and the seven included NWCA Wetland Types, and description of the aggregation of these
types for analysis
Target Population NWCA wetland type Aggregated type Description
Wetlands across conterminous
United States representing
tidal and nontidal systems
with rooted vegetation and,
when present,
open water ≤ 1-m deep
Estuarine
intertidal
EH—Estuarine
intertidal emergent
EW—Estuarine
intertidal shrub/forest
EH—Estuarine
herbaceous
EW—Estuarine woody
Estuarine or intertidal
emergent wetlands
Estuarine or intertidal
shrub and forested
wetlands
Inland PRL-EM —Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine
emergent
PRL-UBAB—Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine
unconsolidated
bottom/aquatic bed
PRL-f—Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine
farmed (not actively
farmed)
PRLH—Palustrine,
riverine, and
lacustrine herbaceous
Emergent, ponded,
or previously farmed
wetlands in palustrine,
shallow riverine,
or shallow lacustrine
littoral settings
PRL-SS—Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine
shrub/scrub
PRL-FO—Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine
forested
PRLW—Palustrine,
riverine, and lacustrine
woody
Forest or shrub dominated
wetlands in palustrine,
shallow riverine,
or shallow lacustrine
littoral settings
322 Page 4 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
or shallow lacustrine) herbaceous (PRLH) and woody
(PRLH) wetlands. Separate reporting groups ( n =8 )
were defined for herbaceous and woody inland types
by NWCA ecoregion (Table 2). Estuarine intertidal sys-
tems occurred in seaward coastal areas of the US (Fig.1), but
were much more common in the Coastal Plains (CPL,n =
306) ecoregion than in the Eastern Mountains and Upper
Midwest (EMU,n = 14) or the West (W,n = 25) ecoregions.
Due to sample size limitations in the EMU and W, estuarine
wetlands were grouped across the CPL, EMU, and W
ecoregions and classed into two reporting groups based on
aggregated wetland type: all-estuarine intertidal herbaceous
(ALL-EH) and all-estuarine intertidal woody (ALL-EW)
(Table2). The 10 NWCA reporting groups were used for
defining reference expectations, informing development of
the VMMI, and reporting results.
Reference expectations and disturbance categories
A set of reference sites and a set of most disturbed sites
are needed for MMI development (Stoddard et al.2008).
Unfortunately, local- and global-scale human-caused
changes to the environment have resulted in pristine
natural conditions being rare or absent in most locations,
so it is often necessary to characterize reference condition
in relation to the least disturbed sites in a sampled popu-
lation (Stoddard et al. 2006; Herlihy et al. 2008, 2013).
This approach for defining reference expectations for
potential VMMIs was adopted for the NWCA and we
use the terms Breference^ and Bleast disturbed^ inter-
changeably throughout this paper. The most disturbed
sites were identified relative to the highest disturbance
level observed in a particular sampled population.
Fig. 1 Study area map. Locations of sites sampled in the 2011
National Wetland Condition Assessment (NWCA) by aggregated
wetland type (see Table 2) within the four NWCA Ecoregions
(USEPA 2016n). Note, due to map scale and site proximity,
individual sites are occasionally obscured by symbols for other
sites
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 5 of 28 322
Both least and most disturbed sites for the NWCA
were identified by Herlihy et al. ( 2019a) using specific
quantitative criteria, which are briefly summarized here.
The presence, abundance, or severity of 85 specific
descriptors of disturbance were characterized based on
data or samples collected at each of the 1138 sampled
sites, within the Assessment Area (AA) (Fig.2)a n d / o ra
spatial buffer (typically a radius of 100 m) surrounding
the AA (USEPA 2011a, 2016n). Disturbance was quan-
tified using ten site-level indices derived from these field
descriptors (see Herlihy et al. 2019a and disturbance
index data: USEP A 2016a). Six of the indices summa-
rized categories of physical disturbances (agriculture,
residential/urban, industrial, hydrologic modifications,
habitat modifications, overall disturbance) in the AA
and buffer area and two described the impact level of
hydrologic alterations in the AA (Lomnicky et al.2019).
One disturbance index described heavy metals in the
soil in the AA (Nahlik et al. 2019) and one quantified
relative cover of alien plant species in the AA (USEP A
2016n).
The level of disturbance observed for the NWCA
sampled sites, based on these ten indices, varied by
reporting group; thus, separate reporting group-specific
screening thresholds for least and most disturbed status
were developed for each disturbance index (Herlihy
et al. 2019a). Herlihy et al. ( 2019a)a s s i g n e de a c hs a m -
pled site to a disturbance category, such that (1) refer-
ence sites were identified as those where all ten distur-
bance index values fell below reporting group thresh-
olds for least disturbed status, whereas exceeding the
least disturbed threshold for any index disqualified a site
Ta bl e 2Distribution of the 1138 sites (967 probability + 171 non-
probability) sampled in the 2011 NWCA nationally, for calibration
and validation data, and by reporting group, including total
number of sites, number of sites within disturbance category, and
number of revisit sites
NWCA data subset Total Least
disturbed
Intermediate
disturbance
Most
disturbed
Revisitb
Nationally All sites a 1138 277 529 332 96
Calibration data 911 222 423 266 78
V alidation data 227 55 106 66 18
Reporting groups (ecoregionc × wetland typed)
ALL-EH All —Estuarine intertidal
herbaceous
272 100 90 82 18
ALL-EW All —Estuarine intertidal woody 73 16 38 19 3
CPL-PRLH Coastal Plain —Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine herbaceous
72 16 36 20 3
CPL-PRLW Coastal Plain —Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine woody
189 37 97 55 11
EMU-PRLH Eastern Mountains and Upper
Midwest—Palustrine, riverine,
or lacustrine herbaceous
73 16 33 24 10
EMU-PRLW Eastern Mountains and
Upper Midwest—Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine woody
127 21 79 27 15
IPL-PRLH Interior Plains —Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine herbaceous
138 26 70 42 16
IPL-PRLW Interior Plains —Palustrine,
riverine, or lacustrine woody
52 12 26 14 3
W-PRLH West —Palustrine, riverine,
or lacustrine herbaceous
75 17 30 28 9
W-PRLW West —Palustrine, riverine,
or lacustrine woody
67 16 30 21 8
a Rows in table represent subsets of the all sites totals
b All revisit sites were sampled twice and were probability sites
c See Fig. 1 for NWCA ecoregion boundaries
d See Table 1 for definition of aggregated wetland types
322 Page 6 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
from least disturbed status; (2) exceeding the most dis-
turbed threshold for any one of the disturbance metrics
placed a site into the most disturbed category; and (3) all
other sites were placed in the intermediate disturbance
category. The number of sampled sites within reporting
groups by disturbance category is provided in Table 2.
V ariation in disturbance levels for reference sites
V ariation in disturbance levels for reference sites across
the ecoregion × wetland type reporting groups can have
implications for interpreting biological condition. Con-
sequently, we examined overall site-scale disturbance
among the least disturbed sites sampled in each
reporting group. First, for each of the 10 disturbance
indices, we standardized values across all sites to a 0 to
10 continuous scale using the formula: ((observed value
− minimum)/(maximum − minimum) × 10). Next, the
standardized scores for the 10 indices at each site were
summed to obtain an overall disturbance index (DI)
value with a potential range from 0 to 100. We evaluated
box-and-whisker plots of DI values for the least
disturbed sites to identify any differences in reference
site quality among reporting groups.
V egetation data collection and preparation
Collecting vegetation data at the scale of the contermi-
nous US required specific expertise and training to
ensure data quality. Each four-person field crew includ-
ed a two-member vegetation team, at least one of whom
was a botanist with strong expertise in the flora of the
state or region where the crew worked. The 53 crews
that conducted field work received intensive training in
NWCA sampling protocols prior to the 2011 field sea-
son (McCauley et al. 2019). Early in the field season,
trainers provided on-site feedback to each crew to en-
sure sampling protocols were correctly and consistently
implemented. Crews had access to protocol and logistics
support experts who could address questions that arose
during sampling throughout the field season. Data from
completed vegetation field forms were electronically
scanned into the NWCA database, and quality assurance
(QA) review was conducted to identify and resolve any
potential errors. QA checks included verification that (1)
data forms scanned properly, (2) plant names were
spelled correctly, (3) data fell into valid ranges and legal
values for each data type, and (4) data conformed to a
series of logic checks across related data types (USEP A
2016n).
Field and laboratory methods for collecting vegeta-
tion data are briefly described here and detailed else-
where (USEP A2011a, b). V egetation data were collect-
ed in 2011 during the peak growing season (determined
regionally as the time span when most plants were in
flower or fruit) to optimize species identification and
characterization of species abundance. At each site, data
were gathered in five 100-m 2 vegetation (V eg) plots
placed systematically in an AA that was typically a
0.5-ha circular area (Fig. 2). Alternate configurations
for AA shape, smaller AA size, and other systematic
V eg plot layouts were used only when necessary, as
determined by rules related to specific site conditions.
All vascular plant taxa occurring in each V eg plot were
identified to the lowest taxonomic level possible (typi-
cally species or lower, but occasionally to genus or
family). Specimens were collected for plant taxa that
could not be identified in the field, and were later
identified in the lab by regionally designated expert
botanists. Taxonomy for all observed vascular plant taxa
Fig. 2 V egetation plot layout for standard circular assessment area
(AA). All features drawn to scale
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 7 of 28 322
was standardized to PLANTS Database (USDA-NRCS
2014)n o m e n c l a t u r e( U S E P A2016n).
Percent cover for each vascular taxon was estimated,
as a direct percentage (0 to 100%), across the entire 100-
m2 area of each V eg plot (field data: USEPA2016c). To
provide spatial context and facilitate cover estimation,
the four quarters of each V eg plot (each quarter
representing 25% of the plot area) were demarcated with
flagging, and nested quadrats (representing 1% and 10%
of the plot area) were established in the SW and NE
corners of the V eg plot. Additional data describing trees
were collected, including (1) counts in estimated diam-
eter classes for live trees by species and for all standing
dead trees and (2) cover estimates for live trees by
species within height classes (field data: USEPA
2016g). Data describing percent cover of vascular veg-
etation in structural classes based on height, cover for
non-vascular groups (i.e., bryophytes, lichens, and al-
gae), and ground surface attributes (e.g., water cover and
depth; bare ground cover and type; litter cover, depth,
and type; and woody debris) were also gathered (field
data: USEP A2016j).
Candidate metric development and species trait
acquisition
Prior to the 2011 survey, potential indicators of wetland
condition were identified based on extensive literature
review and a collaborative workshop involving approx-
imately 150 wetland scientists and managers (NWCA
partners from states, tribes, federal agencies, universi-
ties, and other organizations). From this process, key
vegetation metric groups, each encompassing a variety
of metric types (Table 3), were recognized as biological
categories for potential candidate metrics. Among
existing wetland VMMIs or VIBIs any given index
typically included only a subset of the identified metric
groups, and the selected metric groups and metric types
varied with wetland type, region, and management ob-
jectives (Mack and Kentula 2010). Thus, for the
NWCA, we developed numerous candidate metrics for
evaluation to identify those that would be broadly re-
sponsive to disturbance across multiple ecoregions and
wetland types. Plant species data collected in the field
were paired with species trait information to develop
405 candidate vegetation metrics of condition (metric
data: USEPA 2016h) representing the major metric
groups listed in Table 3. All candidate metrics are de-
scribed in the NWCA 2011 Technical Report (USEP A
2016n) and were calculated using scripts written in R
Statistical Software, version 3.1.1 (R Core Team 2015).
To calculate these 405 candidate vegetation metrics, it
was necessary to gather or develop a variety of species
trait information (USEPA 2016n).
Species life history information for growth habit,
duration, and plant category was obtained from the
PLANTS database (USDA-NRCS 2012) and summa-
rized (see USEPA 2016n) to assign life history traits to
the individual vascular taxa observed in the NWCA
(trait data: USEP A2016d). Regionally specific wetland
indicator status (obligate, facultative wetland, faculta-
tive, facultative upland) for each observed NWCA spe-
cies based on the National Wetland Plant List (NWPL)
(USACE 2014) was downloaded from the PLANTS
database (USDA-NRCS2014), and upland (UPL) status
was assigned to all NWCA taxa-region pairs not listed
in the NWPL (trait data: USEP A 2016e).
The proportion or abundance of native and nonnative
flora at a given location can help inform assessment of
ecological condition or stress (Dukes and Mooney
2004; Meyerson and Mooney 2007; Magee et al.
2008, 2010; Ringold et al. 2008). State-level native
status (Table 4) was determined for the approximately
13,000 taxa-state pairs observed across the 1138 sam-
pled sites in the conterminous United States (trait data:
USEP
A 2016b). Native status designations were
assigned for each observed taxon-state pair through
review of numerous taxonomic and ecological sources
(n ≈ 85), including state and regional floras and check-
lists, and state and national floristic databases (USEP A
2016n). For cryptic species or species for which little
information was available, consultation with the
PLANTS Database (USDA-NRCS 2014)n o m e n c l a t u r -
al team helped inform native status determinations.
Coefficients of conservatism (C values, scaled from 0
to 10) describe the responsiveness of individual plant
species to disturbance, based on the habitat(s) in which
each species typically occurs (Wilhelm and Ladd 1988;
Swink and Wilhelm 1979). Lower C values reflect
greater tolerance and higher values reflect greater sensi-
tivity to disturbance. State-level C values for the taxa-
state pairs observed during the 2011 NWCA were ob-
tained or developed (USEPA2016n) by (1) compiling a
database of existing state and regionally specificC value
lists from across the conterminous US, (2) applying the
C values from this database to the NWCA taxa-state
pairs, and (3) identifying the NWCA taxa-state pairs for
which C values were unavailable. For this latter group,
322 Page 8 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
wherever possible, C values were assigned based on
extension of existing C values from ecologically similar
states or regions. For a small number of species-state
pairs, it was necessary to assign C values directly based
on habitat preferences and distribution of these taxa.
Alien plant taxa were assigned C values of 0. The final
C values for the taxa-state pairs observed in 2011 are
provided in a NWCA trait data set (USEP A 2016b).
State or regionally specific C values for the suite of
individual species occurring at a particular site were
used to calculate (1) floristic quality indices and (2)
metrics describing sensitivity or tolerance of individual
plant species to disturbance (USEP A 2016n). Floristic
quality indices and sensitivity or tolerance metrics have
been applied as robust indicators of wetland condition in
many regions of the US (Lopez and Fennessy 2002;
Cohen et al. 2004;M a t t h e w se ta l .2005; Bourdaghs
et al. 2006;M i l l e ra n dW a r d r o p2006; Milburn et al.
2007; Rocchio 2007; Bried et al. 2013; DeBerry et al.
2015; Deberry and Perry 2015; Gara and Stapanian
2015; Minnesota Pollution Control Agency 2015;
Chamberlin and Brooks 2016; Spyreas 2016). Two
common floristic quality indices used to describe wet-
land condition are the mean coefficient of conservatism
(mean C) and the floristic quality assessment index
(FQAI). Both may be calculated based on species pres-
ence only or weighted by species abundance and may
include all species or native species only. Plant sensitiv-
ity to human-mediated disturbance is often described
based on presence or abundance of high C value taxa.
Conversely, tolerance to disturbance is based on pres-
ence or abundance of low C value taxa (Mack and
Kentula 2010).
Developing a national-scale vegetation multimetric
index
Developing the NWCA VMMI involved three major
steps: (1) evaluating candidate vegetation metrics for
effectiveness at indicating ecological condition, (2) stan-
dardizing (scoring) the best performing metrics, and (3)
constructing numerous potential VMMIs from the best
candidate metrics and assessing the efficacy of candi-
date VMMIs to identify the optimum national VMMI.
In support of these analyses, vegetation data were divid-
ed into calibration and validation data sets (80% and
20% of sampled sites, respectively, Table2). To encom-
pass the range of disturbance and wetland types repre-
Ta bl e 3 Metric groups and component metric types for charac-
terizing vegetation condition
Metric Groups Major metric types
Taxa compositiona Richness, diversity, frequency, cover,
and importance for vascular plant
species, genera, families, etc.
Floristic qualitya Mean coefficient of conservatism,
floristic quality assessment index
(versions based on species presence,
or weighted based on species
frequency or cover)
Tolerance/sensitivity
to disturbance
Richness and abundance of sensitive,
insensitive, tolerant, highly tolerant
species
Hydrophytic
statusa
Richness and abundance by wetland
indicator status; wetland indices
Life historya Richness and abundance by growth
habit type, duration/longevity
category, vascular plant category
(e.g., ferns, dicots)
Ve g e t a t i o n
structure
Frequency, cover, importance, diversity,
by structural (height) vegetation
groups
Non-vascular Frequency, cover, importance for ground
or arboreal bryophytes or lichens, algae
Ground Surface
attributes
Frequency, cover, importance, depth,
and types for water, litter, bare ground
Woody debris
and snags
Frequency, cover, importance for
woody debris, counts for snags
Treesa Richness, counts, or frequency, cover
or importance by height or diameter
classes
a Individual metrics in metric group often included versions based
on data describing either all species or native species only. Note:
importance metrics combine frequency and cover
Ta bl e 4 Definition of state-level native status designations for
NWCA taxa
Native status designations
Native: Indigenous to specific states in conterminous US
Introduced: Indigenous outside of, and not native in,
conterminous US
Adventive: Native to some areas of the United States,
but introduced in location of occurrence
Alien: Introduced + adventive
Cryptogenic: Both native and introduced genotypes,
varieties, or subspecies
Nonnative: Alien + cryptogenic
Undetermined: Growth forms, families, genera with
native and alien species
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 9 of 28 322
sented by the NWCA, the 227 sites for the validation set
were designated by stratified-random selection based on
both disturbance category (least, n =5 5 ; i n t e r m e d i a t e ,
n = 106; and most disturbed, n = 66) and broad wetland
type groups (estuarine intertidal (E)): both estuarine
herbaceous (EH) and woody (EW), n = 69; inland her-
baceous: PRLH, n = 72; inland woody: PRLW, n =8 6 ) .
Calibration data were used for candidate metric evalua-
tion, metric standardization, and development of poten-
tial VMMIs. V alidation data were reserved to evaluate
the consistency of potential VMMIs to help avoid
overfitting to the calibration data. Because all data were
collected in 1 year (2011), this comparison does not
insure against overfitting to climate conditions present
in 2011. However, the performance of the VMMI on the
validation data provides the most realistic available
indicator of the VMMI ’s future performance on new
data (V an Sickle 2010), such as the next iteration of
the NWCA. A robust potential VMMI using calibration
data scoring is expected to similarly distinguish least
from most disturbed sites for both calibration and
validation data, and we evaluated this ability using
box-and-whisker plots and two-sample t tests. All
analyses related to VMMI development were con-
ducted using R Statistical Software, version 3.1.1 (R
Core Team 2015).
Step 1—evaluating candidate metrics of condition
Exploratory histograms of values for the 405 candidate
vegetation metrics across all 1138 sampled sites (not
shown) revealed most were strongly non-normal, thus,
nonparametric statistical approaches were used for met-
ric evaluation. We examined the effectiveness of the
candidate condition metrics across the spatial scale of
the conterminous US (using calibration data, n =9 1 1
sites) based on screening criteria for range, repeatability,
and responsiveness.
Metrics with narrow range, many zero values, highly
skewed distributions, or large numbers of identical
values are typically poor indicators of ecological condi-
tion that will inadequately detect signals related to dis-
turbance (Stoddard et al. 2008). We developed two tests
to define sufficient (PASS) and insufficient (FAIL)
range:
Test 1. Identify metrics with a large proportion of 0
values or highly skewed distributions:
(a) If the 75th percentile = 0, i.e., 75% or more of
values are zero, then FAIL
(b) If the 75th percentile = the minimum OR the 25th
percentile = max (indicating 75% of values identi-
cal), then FAIL; ensures that majority of values are
not the same as the minimum or maximum, and
helps eliminate highly skewed variables with most-
ly a single non-zero value
Test 2. Identify metrics with very narrow ranges:
(a) If the metric is a percent variable and (max - 25th
percentile) < 15%, then FAIL
(b) If the metric is not a percent variable and (max - 25th
percentile) < (max/3), then FAIL
If no component of either range test 1 or 2 resulted in
a FAIL, the final assignment for the metric was P ASS.
Repeatability was quantified using signal/noise
(S:N), which is the ratio of variance in a metric across
all sampled sites (signal) to the variance associated with
repeat sampling of some or all of the same sites (noise)
(Kaufmann et al. 1999). All calibration sites were in-
cluded in S:N calculation to estimate signal across as
wide a gradient as possible, and the 78 revisit sites
included in the calibration data (Table 2) that were
sampled twice during the field season were used to
estimate the noise. S:N for each candidate metric was
calculated using the R package Blme4^ version 1.1-7
(Bates et al. 2014), with each metric a response variable,
SITE_ID (a site identifier) as the main factor in a ran-
dom effects model, and the variance components from
the resulting model used to calculate S:N. Metrics with
higher S:N are more likely to show consistent responses
to human-caused disturbance, and S:N values ≤ 1 indi-
cate that sampling a site twice yields as much or more
metric variability as sampling two different sites
(Stoddard et al. 2008). S:N thresholds for retention of
metrics
have been set in other studies to reflect the
variability in the assemblages being sampled, e.g.,
S:N ≥ 4 or 5 for fish metrics, and 2 for macroinvertebrate
metrics (Stoddard et al. 2008). Among the candidate
vegetation metrics that passed the range tests ( n =3 2 9 ) ,
S:N ranged from 0.9 to 159. We set conservative metric
retention criterion for S:N to≥ 10, or ≥ 5 if a metric type
(Table3) was as yet unrepresented in the suite of metrics
passing all other selection criteria.
Responsive candidate metrics distinguish least dis-
turbed (reference) sites from most disturbed sites
322 Page 10 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
(Stoddard et al. 2008). To evaluate metric responsive-
ness, we used a Kruskal-Wallis test (large sample ap-
proximation) with thresholds for metric retention at p ≤
0.01 and chi-squared ≥ 10, or ≥ 5 if a metric type was as
yet unrepresented in the suite of metrics passing all
selection criteria.
To develop a national-scale VMMI, the component
metrics need to have wide applicability across wetland
types and ecoregions. Only 35 of the initial 405 candi-
date condition metrics met this criterion by passing all
screening filters for range, repeatability, and responsive-
ness, and these were retained for consideration in
VMMI development. This final set of candidate metrics
(Table 5) included descriptors of native species compo-
sition, floristic quality, sensitivity or tolerance to distur-
bance, and various life history characteristics. All four
metric types included a variety of metrics based on
species richness, abundance (cover or frequency), or
importance (combining cover and frequency).
Step 2—metric scoring
The final 35 candidate metrics were standardized on a 0
to 10 continuous scale using the calibration data. The
metrics were scored based on interpolation of metric
values between the 5th (floor) and 95th (ceiling) per-
centiles across all calibration sites (Blocksom 2003).
The direction of each metric was determined by the
direction of the difference between the mean of the least
disturbed sites and the mean of the most disturbed sites.
If the difference was positive, better condition is asso-
ciated with higher metric values, and if negative, the
reverse is true. For metrics decreasing with increasing
disturbance, the ceiling was scored as 10 and the floor as
zero. Conversely, for metrics that increased with in-
creasing disturbance, the floor was scored as 10 and
the ceiling as zero. Scores were truncated to 0 or 10 if
observed values fell outside the floor to ceiling range.
The metric scoring based on the calibration data was
applied to the validation data.
Step 3—generating and screening candidate VMMIs
Determining the optimal set of metrics for inclusion in
an MMI is a complex process. For example, using
MMIs describing stream assemblages of
macroinvertebrates and fish as a test case, V an Sickle
(2010) demonstrated that combining the set of maximal-
ly responsive individual candidate condition metrics
was unlikely to yield the MMI with the best perfor-
mance; that is, Bthe performances of individual metrics
do not reliably predict the joint performance of their
summed index.^ He recommended comparing the per-
formance of multiple MMIs built from all possible (or a
large number of random) metric subsets to obtain a
shortlist of high-performing MMIs. A single best MMI
could then be selected from this list based on its overall
performance and attributes of its individual metrics
(e.g., interpretability, reliability, applicability across di-
verse environmental conditions).
We also found in preliminary analyses of NWCA
data that candidate VMMIs based on various sets of
the highest performing metrics, did not perform as well
as the best VMMIs built using V an Sickle ’s approach
(USEP A2016n). Accordingly, we adapted V an Sickle’s
methods (2010) to develop numerous candidate
national-scale VMMIs for the NWCA. This randomiza-
tion procedure allowed determination of an optimum
number of metrics for inclusion in a VMMI and objec-
tive calculation and evaluation of many thousands of
potential VMMIs. Candidate VMMIs were developed
based on all sites in the calibration data set (n =9 1 1 )a n d
the 35 final scored candidate metrics. All candidate
metrics were considered in creating the random combi-
nations of metrics for the candidate VMMIs; there was
no requirement for representing all metric groups
(Table 5)i ne a c hc a n d i d a t eV M M I .E a c hp o t e n t i a l
VMMI was calculated and placed on a 100-point scale
using the formula: VMMI = Σ metric scores × 10/num-
ber of metrics.
The most parsimonious number of metrics to include
in a national VMMI was identified by examining nu-
merous candidate VMMIs based on metric-sets of var-
ious sizes (4, 6, 8, and 10 metrics). We selected a
random set of 10 metrics, then randomly selected 8
metrics from that set of 10. A set of 6 metrics was
randomly selected from the 8 metric set, and a set of 4
was randomly selected from the 6 metric set. This pro-
cess was repeated 5000 times for combinations of 4, 6,
8,
and 10 metrics, for a total of 20,000 potential VMMIs.
The resulting potential VMMIs were then evaluated
using a series of performance criteria to determine
which were most effective. Parametric statistics were
used because MMIs that are the sum of several metrics
tend to have normal distributions (Fore et al. 1994),
even though individual metrics may be skewed.
Performance statistics for evaluating the candidate
VMMIs included measures of redundancy, sensitivity,
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 11 of 28 322
repeatability, and precision. To avoid metric redundan-
cy, it has been generally argued that metrics included in
a MMI should not be strongly correlated (e.g., Cao et al.
2007;S t o d d a r de ta l .2008;P o n te ta l .2009; V an Sickle
2010). In addition, V an Sickle (2010)d e m o n s t r a t e dt h a t
smaller mean correlation among component metrics
resulted in stronger performing MMIs. Thus, only can-
didate VMMIs with maximum and mean Pearson cor-
relations among component metrics of < 0.75 and < 0.5,
respectively, were retained for further review. Next, we
evaluated the sensitivity of each VMMI using an inter-
val test (Kilgour et al.1998) to determine the percentage
of most disturbed sites that were identified as having
impacted vegetation, based on the VMMI. The interval
test was used to determine whether the VMMI value for
a given site was significantly lower than the 5th percen-
tile of the reference VMMI distribution. The test as-
sumed a normal reference distribution for the VMMI
and used a non-central F distribution to model uncer-
tainty in the 5th percentile of that distribution, which
was necessary because the estimate of the 5th percentile
was based on a finite sample from the reference popu-
lation (V an Sickle 2010). This test allowed us to com-
pare an individual sample to a critical F value to deter-
mine whether impact on vegetation was detected. It is a
more conservative approach than simply comparing the
VMMI at a site to a 5th percentile threshold because it
takes into account that uncertainty around the estimate
of the 5th percentile (Kilgour et al. 1998). Repeatability
for each candidate VMMI was assessed within the cal-
ibration data using a S:N ratio (Kaufmann et al. 1999)
calculated based on data from the primary sampling
visits for each site ( n = 911 sites) and repeat sampling
visits for a subset of these sites (n = 78 revisit sites). The
standard deviation (SD) of VMMI values among the
least disturbed reference sites was used to describe
precision.
To identify the most effective candidate VMMIs in
each metric set (4-, 6-, 8-, or 10-metric VMMIs), we first
arranged all candidate VMMIs that passed the correla-
tion filter in order of decreasing sensitivity. Typically,
the VMMIs with the lowest correlations were also the
most sensitive. Next, for the one or two hundred most
sensitive VMMIs in each set, those with the lowest
mean and maximum correlation among component met-
rics were identified. Among these, the VMMIs with the
highest S:N and smallest SD were examined. We found
the highest performing national-scale candidate VMMIs
from across all the metric size sets included 4 metrics.
Ta bl e 5 V egetation metrics that passed range, repeatability, and
responsiveness screening filters based on calibration data (n =9 1 1
sites)
Metric groups (headings)/Individual metrics (indented)
Native species
Percent native richness
Relative frequency of native species
Relative cover native species
Relative importance of native species
Mean between plot dissimilarity native species
Floristic quality
Mean C native species
Mean C all species
Mean C native species, cover weighted
Mean C all species, cover weighted
FQAI native
FQAI all species
FQAI native cover weighted
FQAI all species, cover weighted
Sensitivity or tolerance
Richness sensitive species
Richness tolerant species
Richness highly tolerant species
Percent richness sensitive species
P e r c e n tr i c h n e s st o l e r a n ts p e c i e s
Relative cover sensitive species
Relative cover tolerant species
Relative cover highly tolerant species
Life history
P e r c e n tr i c h n e s so b l i g a t es p e c i e s
Percent richness facultative wetland species
Percent richness facultative species
Wetland index, cover weighted
Percent richness native graminoid species
Relative cover native graminoid species
Percent richness native monocot species
Relative cover native monocot species
Percent richness native herbaceous species
Relative cover native herbaceous species
Richness vine species
P e r c e n tr i c h n e s sa n n u a ls p e c i e s
Percent richness perennial native species
Other
Mean litter depth
Metric formulas defined in (USEP A2016n)
322 Page 12 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
Some 6-metric VMMIs also performed well, but typi-
cally included multiple metrics that reflected informa-
tion contained in a single metric in the best performing
4-metric VMMIs. Few 8- or 10-metric VMMIs per-
formed well, and all had lower sensitivity and higher
metric correlations than the best VMMIs based on fewer
metrics. Thus, the most parsimonious VMMI would
have between 4 and 6 metrics.
Based on these screening results, we examined a
larger pool of potential VMMIs based on 4, 5, or 6
metrics to identify the best overall national VMMI.
Candidate VMMIs using all combinations of 4 ( n =
52,360) and 5 ( n = 324,632) metrics were generated.
We did not try to construct VMMIs for all combinations
of 6 metrics (n = 1,623,160) because the computing time
required was problematic; however, we evaluated
400,000 randomly assembled 6-metric VMMIs. From
this set of analyses, potential VMMIs passing the mean
and maximum correlation filters included: 578 with 4
metrics, 483 with 5 metrics, and 202 with 6 metrics.
This group of candidate VMMIs was further evaluated
based on sensitivity, repeatability, and precision to iden-
tify the highest performing VMMI in each of the three
metric size sets. Finally, box-and-whisker plots were
created for the most promising 4-, 5-, and 6-metric
VMMIs to evaluate responsiveness by comparing how
well each VMMI distinguished the least and most dis-
turbed sites for (1) calibration data vs. validation data at
the national-scale and (2) for each of the 10 NWCA
reporting groups (Table 2). All of this information was
viewed together to inform the selection of the final
national VMMI. For the selected VMMI, a final evalu-
ation of responsiveness w as conducted using two-
sample t tests to compare mean VMMI values between
all sampled least and most disturbed sites by reporting
group.
Condition category definition and wetland area
estimation
Biological condition categories (good, fair, and poor)
were defined in relation to reference, following the
percentile approach as described in Paulsen et al.
(2008), which is based on the distribution of observed
values for the final VMMI across all sampled least
disturbed sites (both calibration and validation). Condi-
tion thresholds were defined separately for each of the
10 reporting groups to account for natural variation
among ecoregions and wetland types and for differences
in disturbance levels across the conterminous US.Good
condition was defined by VMMI values greater than or
equal to the 25th percentile, fair condition ranged from
the 5th up to the 25th percentile, andpoor condition was
delimited as less than the 5th percentile for the least
disturbed sites. Each NWCA site was assigned to a
condition category based on its VMMI value and the
thresholds for the reporting group in which the site
occurred.
Condition status and the sample-weights for the sam-
pled probability sites (n =9 6 7 )w e r eu s e dt oe s t i m a t et h e
area of the inference (sampled) population in good, fair,
and poor condition at the national scale and for each of
the ten reporting groups (USEP A 2016m, n). Although
the condition status for individual sites is determined by
VMMI thresholds for condition categories specific to
the NWCA reporting group in which the site occurs,
condition estimates can also be summarized for other
wetland subpopulations, assuming a sufficient number
of sample sites (ideally ≥ 50) (Larsen 1997). Using this
approach, we also examined estimates of wetland area
by condition categories for xeric vs. mesic/montane
landscapes in the West. In all cases, estimates and con-
fidence intervals for area in good, fair, and poor condi-
tion were calculated using the R package Bspsurvey^
(Kincaid and Olsen 2016).
Results and discussion
Disturbance and reference site quality
The site-level disturbance index (DI) ranged from 0 to
37 across all sampled sites ( n = 1138) and from 0 to 14
for sampled reference sites (n = 277). Reference quality,
as reflected by DI values for the least disturbed sites,
varied by reporting group (Fig.3). Reference sites in the
estuarine intertidal reporting groups (EH and EW) had
the lowest observed site-scale disturbance. Among in-
land wetland reference sites within ecoregions, the her-
baceous (PRLH) types tended to have greater or more
variable levels of disturbance than did the woody
(PRLW) types. In addition, for inland wetland types,
the quality of sampled reference sites was better (median
DI was lower) and less variable (interquartile ranges
smaller) for ecoregions in the eastern half of the country
(CPL, Coastal Plains; EMU, Eastern Mountains and
Upper Midwest) than in the western half (IPL, Interior
Plains; W, West). Regional variation in reference site
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 13 of 28 322
quality has been observed for other aquatic systems in
NARS assessments (e.g., Herlihy et al. 2008;U S E P A
2016k) and is likely to occur in most large-scale studies
because disturbance intensity and human land uses often
vary geographically (Stoddard et al. 2006).
T h en a t i o n a l - s c a l eV M M I
Among the 4-, 5-, and 6-metric candidate VMMIs that
passed the between-metric correlation screens, the
VMMI in each metric-size group with the greatest
sensitivity was also characterized by component met-
rics that were relatively easy to measure and interpret
(Table 6). These three top-performing VMMIs shared
the same sensitivity value (48.1%) and had similar
standard deviation (11.2 to 12.5) in reference site
VMMI values. Repeatability (S:N) for all three indices
was high, ranging from 16.0 to 23.4, with S:N for the 4-
metric VMMI in the middle at 19. However, compared
to the 5- and 6-metric VMMIs, the 4-metric VMMI had
lower maximum and mean correlation among metrics.
The 4-metric VMMI included a floristic quality assess-
ment index (FQAI) based on all species present, relative
importance of native species, richness of disturbance-
tolerant species, and relative cover of native monocot
species (Table 7). Three of these metrics (FQAI, rich-
ness of disturbance-tolerant species, and relative cover
of native monocots) were also components of the 5- and
6-metric VMMIs (Table 6). The two additional metrics
incorporated in the 5-metric VMMI (native species
percent richness and relative cover), when considered
together, provide information similar to the relative
importance of native species metric of the 4-metric
VMMI. Likewise, two metrics included in the 6-
metric VMMI (relative frequency and relative cover
of native species) are the specific components of the
relative importance of native species metric. The final
metric making-up the 6-metric VMMI was the mean
coefficient of conservatism (mean C), which, like
FQAI, describes overall floristic quality. Similar sensi-
tivity for the top three candidate VMMIs was not sur-
prising given their overlap in ecological content. How-
ever, obtaining the same sensitivity value for all three
was likely somewhat coincidental; for each of the best
VMMIs, 128 most disturbed sites tested as below the
5th percentile of VMMI values for the least disturbed
sites but 18 sites varied as impacted or not with no
particular pattern across the best 4-, best 5-, and best 6-
metric VMMIs. Box-and-whisker plot comparisons of
VMMI values across least and most disturbed sites,
nationally and by reporting group (shown only for the
4-metric VMMI; Figs. 4 and 5) revealed similar distri-
butions for the 4-, 5-, and 6-metric indices. However,
the 4-metric VMMI exhibited slightly greater separa-
tion between the least and most disturbed sites for the
IPL-PRLH and the W-PRLH reporting groups (Fig. 5),
where disturbance levels among reference sites were
relatively high and DI values most variable (Fig. 3).
Based on the overall performance of the 4-metric
VMMI and parallel content in the 5- and 6-metric VMMIs,
we selected the 4-metric index (Table 7)a st h em o s t
parsimonious and adopted it as the national-scale VMMI
for the 2011 NWCA. The floor and ceiling values
and formulas for standard izing the four metrics
comprising the national VMMI are provided in Table 8.
Standardized metric scores range continuously from 0 to
10, with higher values reflecting more intact conditions.
The VMMI for each sampled site was calculated by sum-
ming the scored values for the four metrics and multiplying
by a scaling factor (10/4) to place it on a continuous 0 to
100 scale.
Box-and-whisker plot comparisons of the 4-metric
VMMI values for the least and most disturbed sites
within the calibration and the validation data sets
showed similar patterns in the distribution of VMMI
values, and clear separation of least disturbed from most
disturbed sites in both data sets (Fig. 4). However, not
surprisingly, the box-and-whisker plots did indicate
somewhat degraded responsiveness of the VMMI in
distinguishing between least and most disturbed sites
for the validation data relative to the calibration data. To
examine the severity of this degradation, we conducted
a two-sample t test comparing VMMI means between
the least and most disturbed sites for the calibration data
and for the validation data (Table 9). The VMMI means
across the two data sets were similar for the least
disturbed and for the most disturbed sites, though
stand
ard errors were somewhat higher for the vali-
dation data where sample sizes were smaller. For
both data sets, VMMI values for the least and most
disturbed sites were highly significantly different
(p < 0.0001), though the t statistic was smaller for
the validation data. Because the mean VMMI values
were similar and the 4-metric VMMI significantly
distinguishes reference from most disturbed for both
calibration and validation data, we concluded that it
is likely to be a satisfactory indicator of condition.
This consistency is promising and hopefully
322 Page 14 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
presages reliable VMMI results for data collected in
future years.
Next, we looked at the performance statistics for the
national VMMI across all sampled sites. S:N was high
(20.9, n = 1138 sites), reflecting consistency between
repeat samplings during the same field season. The
low maximum (0.4) and mean (0.1) correlation values
indicate that individual metrics contribute unique infor-
mation about condition. Sensitivity based on calibration
sites (n = 911) was 48.1%, but 42.8% when all sampled
sites (n = 1138 sites) were considered. This difference is
likely related to increased variability in reference site
quality with the addition of the validation data and
consequently increased variability in VMMI values
among the least disturbed sites (e.g., SD: calibration =
11.5, all sites = 12.2). Interval test results are influenced
by SD, so within-group VMMI values with more vari-
ation among least disturbed sites will tend to result in
more most disturbed sites inside the reference range
(V an Sickle 2010). Nevertheless, the sensitivity levels
observed for the national VMMI for the 2011 NWCA
compare favorably with sensitivity values reported for
MMIs for other biological assemblages (e.g., wadeable
stream MMIs for macroinvertebrates, vertebrates, or fish
where sensitivity for 6 MMIs ranged from ~ 10 to 40%
and for 2 MMIs was ~ 60% (V an Sickle 2010)).
VMMI values for the least disturbed sites varied in
median and range across reporting groups (Fig. 5),
reflecting differences in plant species composition and
abundance across the NWCA ecoregions and wetland
types (see Fig. 2 in Herlihy et al. 2019a). To address this
natural variability, threshold values for good, fair, and
poor condition were set within reporting groups based
on the distribution of the VMMI values for the least
disturbed sites within each group (Table10). In addition,
disturbance levels, and, therefore, the quality of refer-
ence sites, varied ecoregionally and by wetland type
(Fig. 3). This covariation of natural vegetation and dis-
turbance with ecoregion and wetland type means that
the VMMI thresholds reflect variation both in natural
conditions and in the quality of reference sites in each
NWCA reporting group. As a result, reporting group
Fig. 3 Comparison of reference site quality by NWCA reporting
group (see Table 2), based on the overall site-scale disturbance
index (DI) for the least disturbed sites. Higher DI values represent
greater site-scale environmental disturbance. For each boxplot, the
box is the interquartile (IQR) range, line in the box is the median,
and whiskers represent the most extreme point a distance of no
more than 1.5 × IQR from the box. V alues beyond this distance are
outliers
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 15 of 28 322
differences in level of disturbance for sampled reference
sites have implications for interpreting and making com-
parisons between good, fair, and poor condition status.
Groups with poorer quality reference sites will have a
lower bar for defining good condition than groups with
higher quality reference sites (Paulsen et al. 2008;
Herlihy et al. 2019a).
Nevertheless, the ability of the VMMI to distinguish
reference from most disturbed sites was highly signifi-
cant for all 10 reporting groups (Table11), and box-and-
whisker plot comparisons (Fig. 5) indicated clear sepa-
ration of VMMI values based on interquartile ranges for
the least and most disturbed sites for 8 of the 10 groups.
For the estuarine intertidal herbaceous (ALL-EH) and
Ta bl e 6 The highest performing 4-, 5-, and 6-metric VMMIs developed using calibration data (n = 911 sites)
VMMI Metrics for candidate VMMI L site mean L site SD S:N Max r among
metrics
Mean r among
metrics
Sensitivity (%)
4-metric Floristic quality assessment index
Relative importance native species
Richness disturbance-tolerant
species
Relative cover native monocots
67.3 11.5 19.4 0.396 0.101 48.1
5-metric Floristic quality assessment index
Percent richness native species
Relative cover native species
Richness disturbance-tolerant
species
Relative cover native monocots
71.6 11.2 16.0 0.599 0.195 48.1
6-metric Floristic quality assessment index
Relative frequency native species
Relative cover native species
Richness disturbance-tolerant
species
Relative cover native monocots
Mean coefficient of conservatism
72.1 12.5 23.4 0.727 0.306 48.1
L = least disturbed (reference) sites, n = 222; M = most disturbed sites, n = 266. SD = standard deviation, S:N = signal/noise (based on the
911 sampled sites and 78 revisit sites from calibration data set), r = Pearson correlation. Sensitivity = Percent M sites with VMMI values
significantly less than the fifth percentile of the distribution of VMMI values for L sites based on an interval test, alpha = 0.05 (Kilgour et al.
1998;V a nS i c k l e2010)
Ta bl e 7 The four metrics included in the final NWCA vegetation multimetric index (VMMI)
Metric name Metric description Calculation a
Floristic quality
assessment index
(FQAI)
Based on all species observed FQAI ¼ ∑CCij= ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃN jp
where CCij = coefficient of conservatism for each unique
species i at site j, N = number of species at site j
Relative importance
native species
Combines relative cover and relative
frequency for native taxa at each site
((∑ Absolute Cover native speciesi /∑ Absolute Cover all
speciesi) X 100 + ( ∑ Frequency native speciesi /∑
Frequency all speciesi)X1 0 0) / 2
where for each unique species i:
Absolute Cover = 0-100%,
Frequency = 0-100%, calculated as the percent of
Ve g P l o ts i n w h i c h i t o c c ur re d
Richness disturbance
tolerant species
Tolerance to disturbance defined as
coefficient of conservatism (CC) ≤ 4
Number of taxa with CC ≤ 4 occurring at a site
Relative cover native
monocots
Relative cover of native monocot
species at each site
(∑ Absolute Cover native monocot speciesi /∑ Absolute
Cover all speciesi) X 100
a Calculation of metrics is based on data collected in the five 100-m 2 vegetation plots at each site
322 Page 16 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
the Interior Plains inland herbaceous (IPL-PRLH) wet-
land groups, the distinction between VMMI values for
reference and most disturbed sites was somewhat less
pronounced (Fig. 5), although still strongly significant
(Table 11).
VMMI values observed in reference sites of the
ALL-EH group overlapped slightly with the upper end
of VMMI values for the most disturbed sites (Fig. 5).
This overlap in vegetation condition may relate to dis-
turbance patterns in the ALL-EH groups. Most (91 of
100) of the least disturbed EH sites were minimally
disturbed, that is, had zero values for all 10 disturbance
indices used in assigning disturbance status (Herlihy
et al. 2019a). Concurrently, the most disturbed EH sites
(n = 82) spanned a gradient from relatively low to rela-
tively high disturbance (DI range = 2.2 to 28, mean ±
SD= 9 ± 5). In addition, all but two of the EH reference
sites were located in the CPL, while the most disturbed
sites spanned greater ecoregional variation (CPL = 55;
EMU = 7; W = 20).
In contrast, the overlap in VMMI values between
reference and most disturbed sites in the IPL-PRLH
group (Fig. 5) indicates a wide range in vegetation
condition across least disturbed sites. This wide varia-
tion in VMMI values for IPL-PRLH reference sites was
likely related, in part, to differences in natural environ-
mental conditions across this large diverse region (IPL,
Fig. 1), and, in part, to reference site quality in the
Interior Plains as reflected by the DI (Fig. 3). Moreover,
agricultural land use (landscape-scale, 1000 m area
surrounding the AA) was greatest for NWCA sampled
sites in the Interior Plains (IPL % cover agriculture, ≥
10% for 82% of sites; median ≈ 50%) (Herlihy et al.
2019c), and this could also relate to the observed range
in VMMI values among least disturbed sites for the IPL-
PRLH group.
Taken together, the combined performance results for
the final VMMI support its utility for assessing wetland
biological condition at a national scale. We also found,
in other work, that the national VMMI with reporting
group thresholds for condition categories performed as
well or better than top-performing candidate VMMIs
based on wetland type groups: estuarine intertidal (EH +
EW), inland herbaceous (PRLH), or inland woody
(PRLW) (USEP A 2016n). Moreover, because the na-
tional VMMI is based on the same set of widely appli-
cable component metrics, it standardizes assessment and
provides a consistent context for describing wetland
condition at the continental-scale of the conterminous
US or for large wetland subpopulations. Site-level
VMMI values, condition status, component metric
values, and component metric scores are available in
USEP A (2016i).
Wetland biological condition
Total wetland area and the area in good, fair, and poor
biological condition as indicated by the national VMMI,
for the 2011 NWCA inference or sampled population
(represented by the 967 sampled probability sites) were
estimated nationally and for the 10 reporting groups as
hectares and percent area including 95% confidence in-
tervals (Fig. 6). The 25.15 ± 2.27 million hectares of
wetland across the conterminous US, represented by the
sampled population, are unequally distributed among
wetland types and ecoregions, reflecting the spatial dis-
tribution of wetlands nationally (Olsen et al.2019). Estu-
arine intertidal systems made-up about 9% (EH ≈ 8%,
EW ≈ 1%) of this area. A much larger proportion of the
Fig. 4 Comparison of the NWCA national vegetation multimetric
(4-metric) index (VMMI) for the calibration and validation data
sets, contrasting all sampled least and most disturbed sites in each
data set. Higher VMMI values reflect better biological condition.
Boxplots: box is interquartile (IQR) range, line in the box is the
median, and whiskers represent most extreme point a distance of
no more than 1.5 × IQR from the box. V alues beyond this distance
are outliers. Numbers below each boxplot represent number of the
least disturbed or most disturbed sites sampled
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 17 of 28 322
sampled population was inland wetland with area varying
by ecoregion and wetland type: 41% in the Coastal Plain
(CPL-PRLH ≈ 6%, CPL-PRLW ≈ 35%), 32% in the
Eastern Mountains and Upper Midwest (EMU-PRLH≈
Fig. 5 Comparison of the NWCA national vegetation multimetric
(4-metric) index (VMMI) values for all sampled least and most
disturbed sites (both calibration and validation) by reporting group
(see Table 2). Higher VMMI values reflect better biological con-
dition. Boxplots: box is interquartile (IQR) range, line is the
median, and whiskers represent most extreme point at a distance
no more than 1.5 × IQR from box. V alues beyond whiskers are
outliers. Numbers below boxplots are numbers of the least or most
disturbed sites sampled in each reporting group
Ta bl e 8 Floor and ceiling values, disturbance response, and interpolation formula for scoring final VMMI metrics. Final scores for each
metric increase with disturbance
Metric Raw data response
to disturbance
Floor
(5th percentile)
Ceiling
(95th percentile)
Scoring formula
(observed = metric value at a site)
Floristic quality
assessment index
Decreases 6.94 38.59 (Observed –6.94)/(38.59–6.94) × 10
Relative importance
native species
Decreases 44.34 100 (Observed –44.34)/(100–44.34) × 10
Richness disturbance-
tolerant Species
Increasesa 04 0.0 ( 40–Observed)/(40–0) × 10
Relative cover
native monocots
Decreases 0.06 100 (Observed–0.06)/(100–0.06) × 10
Scoring based on calibration data (n = 911 sites) and applied to all data ( n = 1138 sites)
a Scoring reversed for metrics where raw data increases with disturbance. Scores truncated to 0 or 10 if observed values fell outside the floor
to ceiling range
322 Page 18 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
6%, EMU-PRLW ≈ 26%), 12% in the Interior Plains
(IPL-PRLH ≈ 7%, IPL-PRLW ≈ 5%), and only 6% in
the West (W-PRLH ≈ 3%, W-PRLW ≈ 3%). The in-
ference population represented 65.5% (± 3.9%) of
the estimated area of the NWCA target population,
with the percent of target population area sampled
varying across the 10 reporting groups primarily in
relation to patterns of landowner denial for site
access or to physical inaccessibility of a site (Olsen
et al. 2019). At the ecoregion scale (Table 12), the
inference population represented the greatest per-
centage of the target population area in the Eastern
Mountains and Upper Midwest (80 ± 8.3%), and the
least in the West (40 ± 8.5%).
Nationally, less than half of the evaluated wetland
resource was in good biological condition: 48 ± 5.1%
was estimated to be in good, 20 ± 4.5% in fair, and 32 ±
4.8% in poor condition (Fig. 6). The concentration of
wetland area in the eastern half of the country means
national-scale condition patterns are strongly influenced
by patterns observed in the CPL and EMU ecoregions.
However, condition results varied among the 10
reporting groups, providing information about level of
impact and potential vulnerabilities at regional and wet-
land type scales. Estuarine intertidal herbaceous (ALL-
EH) and woody (ALL-EW) wetland types shared sim-
ilar patterns in condition; with 58% of their respective
area in good condition and approximately 42% in both
types in fair or poor condition (though the margin of
error for ALL-EW was greater). In the Coastal Plains,
inland herbaceous systems appeared to have lower bio-
logical condition than inland woody systems. The per-
cent area in good condition was somewhat less for CPL-
PRLH (39 ± 15%) compared to CPL-PRLW (50 ± 9%),
but the percent area in poor condition was substantially
greater in CPL-PRLH (59 ± 15%) than in CPL-PRLW
(25 ± 8%). In contrast to the CPL, differences in condi-
tion patterns between PRLH and PRLW in the Eastern
Mountains and Upper Midwest were less pronounced.
However, EMU had a somewhat greater percent area in
poor condition for woody (EMU-PRLW = 41 ± 12%)
vs. herbaceous (EMU-PRLH = 21 ± 15%) systems.
Ta bl e 9 Comparison of vegetation multimetric index (VMMI) means between the least and most disturbed sites for calibration and
validation data sets using two-sample t tests
Least disturbed Most disturbed
Dataset Mean ± SE Mean ± SE t statistic df p value
Calibration 67.32 ± 0.77 45.72 ± 1.18 15.33 443.79 <0.0001
V alidation 65.76 ± 1.99 47.03 ± 2.44 5.94 117.52 <0.0001
See Table 2 for sample sizes of the least and most disturbed sites
SE standard error, df degrees of freedom based on Welch approximation because variances between the least and most disturbed sites are
unequal
Ta bl e 1 0Condition thresholds for each NWCA reporting group based on vegetation multimetric index (VMMI) values
NWCA reporting group Poor condition VMMI threshold Good condition VMMI threshold
ALL-EH ˂ 65.0 ≥ 74.1
ALL-EW ˂ 56.0 ≥ 62.9
CPL-PRLH ˂ 57.3 ≥ 62.5
CPL-PRLW ˂ 52.8 ≥ 58.6
EMU-PRLH ˂ 41.6 ≥ 63.0
EMU-PRLW ˂ 55.8 ≥ 60.5
IPL-PRLH ˂ 25.3 ≥ 36.2
IPL-PRLW ˂ 40.3 ≥ 49.4
W-PRLH ˂ 30.0 ≥ 57.4
W-PRLW ˂ 47.9 ≥ 54.4
See the BMethods^ section for threshold criteria. Sites falling between the good and poor thresholds are considered fair. NWCA reporting
groups are defined in Table 2
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 19 of 28 322
When considering condition estimates in the Interior
Plains and West (Fig. 6), it is important to recall that
reference site quality based o n DI values for least dis-
turbed sites (Fig.3) was lower for inland wetlands in the
IPL and W than in the eastern half of the conterminous
US. Thus, the lower bounds for good condition for IPL
and W inland wetland reporting groups (Table10)r e f l e c t
not only reporting group-specific biotic attributes but also
the greater disturbance observed in reference sites, poten-
tially setting a lower standardfor good condition than in
eastern reporting groups. IPL herbaceous wetland also
exhibited a wide range in VMMI values for least
disturbed sites (Fig. 5). Consequently, the 60 ± 12%
of IPL-PRLH wetland area categorized as having
good vegetation conditi on must be viewed in the
context of variability in reference sites for this
reporting group. In contrast, in the IPL-PRLW, the
sampled least disturbed sites exhibited a smaller
range in DI (Fig. 3) and less variability in VMMI
values (Fig. 5) than the IPL-PRLH. The majority of
the inland woody (IPL-PRLW) area was estimated to
be in fair condition (59 ± 24%).
The greatest disturbance among sampled reference
sites, based on the DI, was in the West, particularly for
herbaceous inland systems (Fig.3). Estimates of biological
condition (Fig.6) for W-PRLH showed the majority of its
area in poor (43 ± 22%) to fair (32 ± 18%) condition, with
only 25 ± 16% in good condition, but note the overlapping
margins of error. Inland woody (W-PRLW) types appeared
to be the most highly impacted of any reporting group,
with estimates showing only 21 ± 10% of their area in
good condition and the greatest proportion in poor condi-
tion (71 ± 14%). Wetlands in the West are represented by
diverse plant communities and span abiotic environments
ranging from xeric to mesic to montane. For VMMI
development in the 2011 NWCA, it was necessary to
merge this varied landscape into one aggregated ecoregion
(Fig. 1) because of sample size limitations within aggre-
gated wetland types (Herlihy et al.2019a). However, other
NARS focusing on stream ecosystems divided the West
into two aggregated ecoregions, the Xeric West (XER) and
the Western Mountains and V alleys (WMT) (Paulsen et al.
2008).
To evaluate whether patterns of biological condition
varied across the xeric to mesic/montane west, we com-
pared condition estimates based on all sampled wetland
types (EH, PRLH, PRLW) occurring in the XER and
WMT regions (Fig. 7). Patterns of condition were quite
different between the two regions, with 60 ± 15% of the
area in the WMT estimated to be in good condition and
76 ± 15% of the area in the XER designated in poor
condition. Thus, the scale at which condition results are
viewed can provide very different perspectives. The
estimated wetland area is greater in the XER compared
to the WMT ecoregion (Fig. 7), so this may be driving
overall results for the portion of the inference population
representing inland wetlands across the West (Fig.
6); however, mesic/montane systems currently ap-
pear to be in better condition than xeric systems
based on the 2011 VMMI (Fig. 7). Nevertheless,
when viewing these results, it is important to con-
sider that the percent of the estimated target popu-
lation area represented by the sampled sites is great-
er in the XER region (52%) than the WMT region
(24%) (Table 12).
Going forward, beginning with NWCA 2016, the
survey design has been adjusted to increase the number
of potential sample sites in the West (Olsen et al. 2019).
Ta bl e 11 Comparison of vegetation multimetric index (VMMI)
means between least and most disturbed sites by reporting group
using two-sample t tests
Reporting groupa t statistic p value df
ALL-EH 8.24 < 0.00001 180
ALL-EW 4.56 0.00007 33
CPL-PRLH 4.39 0.0001 34
CPL-PRLW 5.45 < 0.00001 90
EMU-PRLH 5.53 < 0.00001 38
EMU-PRLW 4.84 0.00002 46
IPL-PRLH 4.52 0.00003 66
IPL-PRLW 4.90 0.00005 24
W-PRLH 4.96 0.00001 43
W-PRLW 4.08 0.00025 35
df degrees of freedom
a Definitions and sample sizes provided in Table 2
Fig. 6 Estimates of wetland area and area in good, fair, and poor
conditions based on the vegetation multimetric index (VMMI), for
the inference population (25.15 ± 2.27 million hectares) represent-
ed by the NWCA sampled probability sites ( n = 967). Results are
reported nationally and by reporting group (region (micro maps)
by wetland type (prefix E = estuarine intertidal wetlands, prefix
PRL = inland wetlands (palustrine, riverine, or lacustrine), suffix H
= herbaceous, suffix W = woody)). Sampled probability sites and
sample-weights from the survey design were used to estimate
areas. Margin of error estimates and error bars are two-sided
95% confidence intervals
b
322 Page 20 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 21 of 28 322
A larger sample of sites could better represent wetland
types across the West and enhance the precision of
condition evaluation (i.e., reduce the margin of error
surrounding the estimates) and will hopefully facilitate
identification of a greater number of reference sites with
limited levels of disturbance. Larger sample sizes should
also allow development of specific condition thresholds
for the NWCA aggregated wetland types (Table 1)f o r
the Western Mountains and V alleys and for the Xeric
West.
Summary and next steps
National-scale VMMI
We developed a VMMI applic able to diverse wetland
types across the conterminous US (Table 1), and which
provides a standardized approach to assessing wetland
biological condition based on vegetation. The national
VMMI includes four component metrics: a floristic qual-
ity index, relative importance of native species, richness of
disturbance-tolerant species, and relative cover of native
monocots (Table7). This 4-metric VMMI was selected,
from among numerous candidate VMMIs, based on the
combined consideration of several performance
criteria including sensitivity, repeatability, precision,
minimization of metric redundancy, and metric iden-
tity (Table 6). The final VMMI was also strongly
responsive, significantly distinguishing least from
most disturbed sites for all 10 reporting groups
(Table 11). Condition status was designated for each
sampled site based on its VMMI value and the
reporting group-specific condition thresholds associ-
ated with the site (Table 10).
In addition to utility as an indicator of biological
condition for national and reporting group scales, the
NWCA VMMI has potential for use at smaller scales
within the conterminous US. The national VMMI is not
intended to replace existing state, regional, or wetland
type VMMIs that may reflect specific wetland attributes
or be tailored to specific wetland types or state and
regional management needs; however, for states or re-
gions currently without a vegetation index for assessing
biological condition, it may be a useful tool (or starting
point) for supporting wetland monitoring activities. The
NWCA VMMI can be calculated for other wetland sites
in the conterminous US, using the defined metric scor-
ing for the four component metrics (Table 8), the for-
mula for VMMI calculation (sum of metric scores X 10/
4), and the reporting group thresholds for condition
categories (Table 10). This assumes availability of
appropriate plant data and use of NWCA trait infor-
mation or traits derived using similar procedures.
Estimates of wetland area in particular condition
categories require the use of a probability survey
design (e.g., GRTS or other random sample) and
sample-weights that reflect the wetland area repre-
sented by each site.
Finally, with the next iteration of the NWCA, the 2011
national VMMI will be reevaluated in light of (1) expand-
ed sampling effort in some reporting groups and the
addition of reporting groups for the West, (2) characteris-
tics of additional reference sites, and (3) emerging new
metrics. Results of this effort will determine whether
modifications to the VMMI are needed to further enhance
its utility. Initial components of this evaluation will likely
involve repeating the VMMI development process
described in this paper to determine: (1) whether the
best performing national VMMI based on 2016 data
will have the same or a different set of component
metrics as the 2011 VMMI and (2) how thresholds
for good, fair, and poor condition will be influenced
by the addition of more reference sites and reporting
groups.
Baseline assessment of wetland condition
The 2011 NWCA resulted in the first-ever continental-
scale assessment of wetland condition. Results provide
Ta bl e 12Estimated wetland area in NWCA target population and
percent of target population represented by inference (sampled)
population by NWCA ecoregion and for two sub-regions (XER,
WMT) of the West (W)
Ecoregion Estimated target
population area
(millions of ha)
% target population area
represented by inference
population
CPL 19.70 ± 1.51 63 ± 5.7
EMU 10.01 ± 1.16 80 ± 8.3
IPL 4.97 ± 0.74 62 ± 7.7
W 3.73 ± 0.59 40 ± 8.5
XER 2.08 ± 0.18 52 ± 9.5
WMT 1.65 ± 0.29 24 ± 10.1
Margin of error estimates are two-side 95% confidence intervals.
See Figs. 1 and 7 for ecoregion definitions
322 Page 22 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
a baseline description of wetland quality for the sam-
pled wetland population across the conterminous US
with 48 ± 5.1% (12.14 ± 1.42 million ha) of the evalu-
ated resource estimated to be in good condition, 20 ±
4.49% (4.93 ± 1.25 million ha) in fair condition, and
32 ± 4.76% (8.10 ± 1.37 million ha) in poor condition.
Condition results varied among the 10 reporting
groups, providing information about levels of impact
and potential vulnerabilities at regional and wetland
type scales. The 2011 baseline for biological condi-
tion can help inform decision-making regarding use,
management, and conservation of wetland resources
and suggest future research priorities. Some addi-
tional insights to ecological implications of the
2011 NWCA results can be found in other work,
including (1) characterization of key stressors to
wetland condition (e.g., hydrological and physical
disturbances (Lomnicky et al. 2019), nonnative
plants (Magee et al. 2019), and soil heavy metals
(Nahlik et al. 2019)) at national and NWCA
reporting group scales and (2) evaluation of relation-
ships between biological condition and specific
stress indicators (Herlihy et al. 2019b ; Herlihy
et al. 2019c).
Future iterations of the NWCA, planned at 5-year
intervals, will allow analysis of changes and trends in
wetland condition. Comparison of the 2011 results with
subsequent NWCA surveys will permit tracking of
whether the biological condition of the wetland resource
is improving (i.e., moving to good condition) or declin-
ing (i.e., moving to poor condition).
Acknowledgments The 2011 National Wetland Condition As-
sessment (NWCA) was planned, funded, and organized by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEP A). Data
used in this paper resulted from the collective effort of many
dedicated field crews, laboratory analysts, data management and
quality control experts, and scientists from USEP A, states, tribes,
federal agencies, universities, and other organizations. More infor-
mation about the NWCA data is available from nars-hq@epa.gov.
We are indebted to Dave Peck (USEP A-Western Ecology Division
(WED)) for generously sharing his expertise and experience in
multimetric index development for a variety of biotic assemblages.
We recognize, with gratitude, our colleagues on the NWCA anal-
ysis team Gregg Serenbetz (USEPA-Wetland Division); Mary
Kentula, Tony Olsen, and Steve Paulsen (USEPA-WED); and
Amanda Nahlik (USEPA-WED, Kenyon College), Gregg
Lomnicky (Dynamac Corporation), and Alan Herlihy (Oregon
State University, USEP A)) for many insightful discussions that
helped inform this paper. Population estimates of wetland area
discussed in this paper were provided by Thomas Kincaid
(USEPA-WED) via the R package Bspsurvey.^ Marc Weber
(USEPA-WED) created the map in Fig. 1 and Marc Weber,
Amanda Nahlik, and Dave Peck contributed the inset maps for
Figs. 6 and 7. Jim Markwiese (USEPA-WED) provided quality
assurance review. Thoughtful comments from Joanna Lemly (Col-
orado Natural Heritage Program, Colorado State University) and
two anonymous reviewers enhanced the paper. The information in
this article was funded by the USEP A. Work by Siobhan Fennessy
was funded under USEP A Cooperative Agreement # 83422601 to
Michigan State University. Gerry Moore (PLANTS Database)
Fig. 7 Estimates of wetland area
and area in good, fair, and poor
conditions based on the
vegetation multimetric index
(VMMI), for the inference
subpopulation represented by
NWCA sampled probability sites
in the Xeric West (XER) and in
the Western Mountains and V al-
leys (WMT). Both regions in-
cluded estuarine herbaceous
(EH), inland herbaceous (PRLH),
and inland woody (PRLW) wet-
land types (defined in Table 2).
Area estimates were completed
using sampled probability sites
and their sample-weights from the
survey design. Margin of error
estimates and error bars are two-
sided 95% confidence intervals
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 23 of 28 322
provided taxonomic expertise and advice on name standardization
and native status determination for observed plant taxa with com-
plex origins through USEP A Interagency Agreement # DW-12-
92355101-0 with United States Department of Agriculture Nation-
al Plants Data Team. This manuscript has been subjected to review
by the Western Ecology Division of the USEPA Office of Re-
search and Development National Health and Environmental Ef-
fects Laboratory and approved for publication. Views expressed in
this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views or policies of the US Environmental Protection Agency.
Mention of trade names or commercial products does not consti-
tute endorsement or recommendation for use.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestrict-
ed use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made.
References
Aguiar, F. C., Ferreira, M. T., Albuquerque, A., Rodriguez-
Gonzalez, P ., & Segurado, P . (2009). Structural and function-
al responses of riparian vegetation to human disturbance:
performance and spatial scale-dependence. Fundamental
and Applied Limnology, 175 (3), 249 –267. https://doi.
org/10.1127/1863-9135/2009/0175-0249.
Bates, D., Maelchler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014). Ime4:
linear mixed-effect models using Eigen and S4. R package
version 1.1–7. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=Ime4.
Blocksom, K. A. (2003). A performance comparison of metric
scoring methods for a multimetric index for Mid-Atlantic
Highlands streams. Environmental Management, 31 (5),
670–682. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-002-2949-3.
Bourdaghs, M., Johnston, C. A., & Regal, R. R. (2006). Properties
and performance of the floristic quality index in Great Lakes
coastal wetlands. Wetlands, 26(3), 718–735.
Bried, J. T., Jog, S. K., & Matthews, J. W . (2013). Floristic quality
assessment signals human disturbance over natural variabil-
ity in a wetland system. Ecological Indicators, 34,2 6 0–267.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2013.05.012.
Bryce, S. (2006). Development of a bird integrity index:
Measuring avian response to disturbance in the Blue
Mountains of Oregon, USA. Environmental Management,
38(3), 470–486.
Bryce, S. A., & Hughes, R. M. (2002). Development of a bird
integrity index: using bird assemblages as indicators of ripar-
ian condition. Environmental Management, 30,2 9 4–310.
Cao, Y ., Hawkins, C. P ., & Olson, J. (2007). Modeling natural
environmental gradients improves the accuracy and precision
of diatom-based indicators. Journal of the North American
Benthological Society, 26(3), 566–585.
Chamberlin, S. J., & Brooks, R. P . (2016). Testing a rapid floristic
quality index on headwa ter wetlands in Central
Pennsylvania, USA. Ecological Indicators, 60, 1142–1149.
Cohen, M. J., Carstenn, S., & Lane, C. R. (2004). Floristic quality
indicies for biotic assessment of depressional marsh condi-
tion in Florida. Ecological Applications, 14(3), 784–794.
Cowardin, L. M., Carter, V ., Golet, F. C., & LaRoe, E. T. (1979).
Classificaton of wetlands and Deepwater habitats of the
United States. FWS/OBS-79/31 . Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Dahl, T. E. (2011). Status and trends of wetlands in the contermi-
nous United States 2004 to 2009(p. 108). Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Department of the Interior; Fish and Wildlife Service.
Dahl, T. E., & Bergeson, M. T. (2009). Technical procedures for
conducting status and trends of the nation’sw e t l a n d s(p. 74).
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, Division
of Habitat and Resource Conservation.
Dale, V . H., & Beyeler, S. C. (2001). Challenges in the develop-
m
ent and use of ecological indicators.Ecological Indicators,
1(1), 3–10.
Deberry, D. A., & Perry, J. E. (2015). Using the floristic quality
concept to assess created and natural wetlands: ecological
and management implications. Ecological Indicators, 53 ,
247–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.02.003.
DeBerry, D. A., Chamberlin, S. J., & Matthews, J. W. (2015).
Trends in floristic quality assessment for wetland evaluation.
W etland Science and Practice, 32(2), 12–22.
Deimeke, E., Cohen, M. J., & Reiss, K. C. (2013). Temporal
stability of vegetation indicators of wetland condition.
Ecological Indicators, 34 ,6 9 –75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2013.04.022.
DeKeyser, E. S., Kirby, D. R., & Ell, M. J. (2003). An index of
plant community integrity: development of the methodology
for assessing prairie wetland plant communities. Ecological
Indicators, 3,1 1 9–133.
DeKeyser, E. S., Biondini, M., Kirby, D., & Hargiss, C. (2009). Low
prairie plant communities of wetlands as a function of distur-
bance: physical parameters.Ecological Indicators, 9(2), 296–
306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2008.05.003.
Diaz-Ramos, S., Stevens, D. L., Jr., & Olsen, A. R. (1996). EMAP
statistical methods manual. EPA/620/r-96/002. Corvallis,
Oregon: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Research and Development, NHEERL-Western Ecology
Division.
Dukes, J. S., & Mooney, H. A. (2004). Disruption of ecosystem
processes in western North America by invasive species.
Revista Chilena de Historia Natural, 77(3), 411–437.
Euliss, N. H., & Mushet, D. M. (2011). A multi-year comparison
of IPCI scores for prairie pothole wetlands: implications of
temporal and spatial variation. Wetlands, 31(4), 713–723.
Ferreira, M. T., Rodryguez-Gonzalez, P . M., Aguiar, F. C., &
Albuquerque, A. (2005). Assessing biotic integrity in
Iberian rivers: development of a multimetric plant index.
Ecological Indicators, 5,1 3 7–149.
Fetscher, A. E., Stancheva, R., Kociolek, J. P ., Sheath, R. G., Stein,
E. D., Mazor, R. D., Ode, P . R., & Busse, L. B. (2014).
Development and comparison of stream indices of biotic
integrity using diatoms vs. non-diatom algae vs. a combina-
tion. Journal of Applied Phycology, 26 (1), 433 –450.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10811-013-0088-2.
Fore, L. S., Karr, J. R., & Conquest, L. L. (1994). Statistical
properties of an index of biological integrity used to evaluate
water resources. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences, 51,1 0 7 7–1087.
322 Page 24 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
Galatowitsch, S., Whited, D., & Tester, J. (1999). Development of
community metrics to evaluate recovery of Minnesota wet-
lands. Journal of Aquatic Ecosystem Stress and Recovery,
6(3), 217–234.
Gara, B. D., & Stapanian, M. A. (2015). A candidate vegetation
index of biological integrity based on species dominance and
habitat fidelity.Ecological Indicators, 50,2 2 5–232.
Genet, J. (2012). Status and trends of wetlands in Minnesota:
depressional wetland quality baseline (p. 80). Saint Paul,
MN: Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Hargiss, C. L. M., DeKeyser, E. S., Kirby, D. R., & Ell, M. J.
(2008). Regional assessment of wetland plant communities
using the index of plant community integrity. Ecological
Indicators, 8(3), 303–307.
H a w k i n s ,C .P . ,C a o ,Y . ,&R o p e r ,B .( 2 0 1 0 ) .M e t h o do fp r e d i c t i n g
reference condition biota affects the performance and interpre-
tation of ecological indices.Freshwater Biology, 55(5), 1066–
1085. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2427.2009.02357.x.
Herlihy, A. T., Gerth, W. J., & Banks, J. L. (2005).
Macroinvertebrate community response to natural and forest
harvest gradients in western Oregon headwater streams.
Freshwater Biology, 50(5), 905–919.
Herlihy, A. T., Paulsen, S. P ., V an Sickle, J., Stoddard, J. L.,
Hawkins, C. P ., & Y uan, L. (2008). Striving for consistency
in a national assessment: the challenges of applying a refer-
ence condition approach at a continental scale.J o u r n a lo ft h e
North American Benthological Society, 27 (4), 860 –877.
https://doi.org/10.1899/08-081.1.
Herlihy, A. T., Sobota, J. B., McDonnell, T. C., Sullivan, T. J.,
Leahman, S., & Tarquinio, E. (2013). An a priori process for
selecting candidate reference lakes for a national survey.
Freshwater Science, 32(2), 385–396.
Herlihy, A. T., Kentula, M. E., Magee, T. K., Lomnicky, G.
A., Nahlik, A. M., Serenbetz, G. (2019a). Striving for
consistency in the National Wetland Condition
Assessment: developing a reference condition approach
for assessing wetlands at a continental scale.
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment . https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10661-019-7325-3 .
Herlihy, A. T., Paulsen, S. G., Kentula, M. E., Magee, T. K.,
Nahlik, A.M., & Lomnicky, G.A. (2019b). Assessing the
relative and attributable risk of stressors to wetland condition
across the conterminous United States. Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment . https://doi.org/10.1007
/s10661-019-7313-7.
Herlihy, A. T., Sifneos, J. C., Lomnicky, G. A., Nahlik, A. M.,
Kentula, M. E., Magee, T. K., Weber, M. H., & Trebitz, A. S.
(2019c). The response of wetland quality indicators to human
disturbance across the United States. Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment . https://doi.org/10.1007
/s10661-019-7323-5.
Hernandez, E. C., Reiss, K. C., & Brown, M. T. (2015). Effect of
time on consistent and repeatable macrophyte index for wet-
land condition. Ecological Indicators, 52 ,5 5 8 –566.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.01.013.
Hughes, R. M., Howlin, S., & Kaufmann, P . R. (2004). A
biointegrity index (IBI) for coldwater streams of western
Oregon and Washington. T ransactions of the American
Fisheries Society, 133,1 4 9 7–1515.
Jackson, L. E., Kurtz, J. C., & Fisher, W. S. (Eds.). (2000).
Evaluation guidelines for ecological indicators. EP A/620/R-
99/005. Research Triangle P ark, North Carolina: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and
Development.
Johnston, C. A., Ghioca, D. M., Tulbure, M., Bedford, B. L.,
Bourdaghs, M., Frieswyk, C. B., V accaro, L., & Zedler, J. B.
(2008). Patitioning vegetation response to athroprogenic stress to
develop multi-taxa wetland indicators.Ecological Applications,
18(4), 983–1001.
Johnston, C. A., Zedler, J. B., Tulbure, M. G., Frieswyk, C. B.,
Bedford, B. L., & V accaro, L. (2009). A unifying approach
for evaluating the condition of wetland plant communities
and identifying related stressors. Ecological Applications,
19(7), 1739–1757. https://doi.org/10.1890/08-1290.1.
Jones, R. C., Hawkins, C. P ., Fennessy, M. S., & V ander Lann, J. J.
(2016). Modeling wetland plant metrics to improve the per-
formance of vegetation-based indices of biological integrity.
Ecological Indicators, 71,5 3 3–543.
Karr, J. R. (1991). Biological integrity: a long-neglected aspect of
water resource management. Ecological Applications, 1(1),
66–84.
Karr, J. R., & Chu, E. W. (1997). Biological monitoring and
assessment: using multimetric indexes effectively. EP A 235-
R-97-001. Seattle: University of Washington.
Kaufmann, P . R., Levine, P ., Robison, E. G., Seeliger, C., & Peck,
D. V . (1999). Quantifying physical habitat in wadable
streams, EPA/620/R_99/003. Washington, D.C: U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
Kentula, M. E., & Paulsen, S. G. (2019) The 2011 National
Wetland Condition Assessment: overview and an invitation.
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment . https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10661-019-7316-4.
Kilgour, B. W., Sommers, K. M., & Matthews, D. E. (1998). Using the
normal range as a criterion forecological significance in envi-
ronmental monitioring and assessment.Ecoscience, 5, 542–550.
Kincaid, T.M. & Olsen, A. R. (2016). spsurvey: spatial survey
design and analysis. R package version 3.3. https://cran.r-
project.org/package=spsurvey.
Larsen, D. P . (1997). Sample survey design issues for bioassess-
ment of inland aquatic ecosystems. Human and Ecological
Risk Assessment: An International Journal, 3,9 7 9–991.
Lemly, J., & Rocchio, J. (2009).V egetation Index of Biotic Integrity
(VIBI) for headwater wetlands in the Southern Rocky
Mountains. V ersion 2.0: Calibration of selected VIBI models
(p. 116). Ft. Collins: Colorado Natural Heritage Program,Warner
College of Natural Resources,Colorado State University.
Lomnicky, G.A., Herlihy, A. T., Kaufmann, P . R. (2019).
Quantifying the extent of human disturbance activities and
anthropogenic stressors in wetlands across the conterminous
United States – results from the National Wetland Condition
Assessment. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment .
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7314-6.
Lopez, R. D., & Fennessy, M. S. (2002). Testing the floristic
quality assessment index as an indicator of wetland condi-
ti
on. Ecological Applications, 12(2), 487–497.
Mack, J. J. (2007). Developing a wetland IBI with statewide
application after multiple testing iterations. Ecological
Indicators, 7(4), 864–881.
Mack, J. (2009). Development issues in extending plant-based
IBIs to forested wetlands in the Midwestern United States.
Wetlands Ecology and Management, 17(2), 117 –130.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11273-008-9094-6.
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 25 of 28 322
Mack, J. J., & Kentula, M. E. (2010). Metric similarity in
vegetation-based wetland assessment methods. EP A/600/R-
10/140. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Office of Research and Development.
Magee, T. K., & Kentula, M. E. (2005). Response of wetland plant
species to hydrologic conditions. Wetlands Ecology and
Management, 13,1 6 3–181.
Magee, T. K., Ernst, T. L., Kentula, M. E., & Dwire, K. A. (1999).
Floristic comparison of freshwater wetlands in an urbanizing
environment. Wetlands, 19(3), 517–534.
Magee, T. K., Ringold, P . L., & Bollman, M. A. (2008). Alien
species importance in native vegetation along wadeable
streams, John Day River basin, Oregon, USA. Plant
Ecology, 195 ,2 8 7–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11258-
007-9330-9.
Magee, T. K., Ringold, P . L., Bollman, M. A., & Ernst, T. L.
(2010). Index of Alien Impact (IAI): a method for evaluating
alien plant species in native ecosystems. Environmental
Management, 45,7 5 9–778.
Magee, T.K., Blocksom, K. A., Herlihy, A. T., & A.M. Nahlik.
(2019). Characterizing nonnative plants in wetlands across
the conterminous United States. Environmental Monitoring
and Assessment . https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7317-
3.
Matthews, J. W., Tessene, P . A., Wiesbrook, S. M., & Zercher, B.
W. (2005). Effect of area and isolation on species richness
and indices of floristic quality in Illinois, USA wetlands.
W etlands, 25(3), 607–615.
McCauley, D. J., Arnold, W. J., Saxton, J. B., & Turner, C. J.
(2019). Applying adaptive management and lessons learned
from national assessments to address logistical challenges in
the National Wetlands Condition Assessment.Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-
019-7320-8.
Meyerson, L. A., & Mooney, H. A. (2007). Invasive alien species
in an era of globalization. Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment, 5(4), 199–208.
Micacchion, M., Stapanian, M. A., & Adams, J. (2015). Site-scale
disturbance and habitat development best predict an index of
Amphibian Biotic Integrity in Ohio shrub and forested wet-
lands. Wetlands, 35 (3), 509 –519. https://doi.org/10.1007
/s13157-015-0638-2.
Milburn, S. A., Bourdaghs, M., & Husveth, J. J. (2007). Floristic
quality assessment for Minnesota wetlands .S t .P a u l :
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
Miller, S. J., & Wardrop, D. H. (2006). Adapting the floristic
quality assessment index to indicate anthropogenic distur-
bance in Central Pennsylvania wetlands. Ecological
Indicators, 6(2), 313–326.
Miller, S. J., Wardrop, D. H., Mahaney, W . M., & Brooks, R. P .
(2006). A plant-based index of biological integrity (IBI) for
headwater wetlands in Central Pennsylvania. Ecological
Indicators, 6(2), 290–312.
Miller, K. M., Mitchell, B. R., & McGill, B. J. (2016).
Co
nstructing multimetric indices and testing ability of land-
scape metrics to assess condition of freshwater wetlands in
the northeastern US. Ecological Indicators, 66 ,1 4 3–152.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.01.017.
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (2015). Status and trends of
wetlands in Minnesota: vegetation quality baseline. wq-bwm-1-
09 Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. St. Paul, MN.
Nahlik, A. M., Blocksom, K. A., Herlihy, A. T., Kentula, M. E.,
Magee T.K., and Paulsen, S.G. (2019). Use of national-scale
data to examine human-mediated additions of heavy metals
to wetland soils of the United States. Environmental
Monitoring and Assessment . https://doi.org/10.1007
/s10661-019-7315-5.
Olsen, A. R., & Peck, D. V . (2008). Survey design and extent
estimates for the Wadeable Streams Assessment. Journal of
the North American Benthological Society, 27,8 2 2–836.
Olsen, A. R., Kincaid, T., & Payton, Q. (2012). Spatially balanced
survey designs for natural resources. In R. A. Gitzen, J. J.
Millspaugh, A. B. Cooper, & D. S. Licht (Eds.), Design and
analysis of long-term ecological monitoring studies .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olsen, A. R., Kincaid, T. M., Kentula, M. E., & Weber, M. H.
(2019). Survey design to assess condition of wetlands in the
United States. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment .
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-019-7322-6.
Paulsen, S. G., Mayio, A., Peck, D. V ., Stoddard, J. L., Tarquinio,
E., Holdsworth, S. M., Sickle, J. V ., Y uan, L. L., Hawkins, C.
P ., Herlihy, A. T., Kaufmann, P . R., Barbour, M. T., Larsen,
D. P ., & Olsen, A. R. (2008). Conditions of stream ecosys-
tems in the US: an overview of the first national assessment.
Journal of the North American Benthological Society, 27(4),
812–821.
Pont, D., Hughes, R. M., Whittier, T. R., & Schumtz, S. (2009). A
predictive index of biotic integrity model for aquatic-
vertebrate assemblages of western U.S. streams.
Transactions of the American Fisheries Society, 138 ,2 9 2–
305.
Quétier, F., Thébault, A., & Lavorel, S. (2007). Plant traits in a
state and transition framework as markers of ecosystem re-
sponse to land-use change. Ecological Monographs, 77(1),
33–52.
R Core Team. (2015). R: A language and environment for statis-
tical computing. Vienna, Austria: R Foundation for Statistical
Computing https://www.R-project.org/.
Reiss, K. C. (2006). Florida w etland condition index for
depressional forested wetlands. Ecological Indicators, 6(2),
337–352.
Ringold, P . L., Magee, T. K., & Peck, D. V . (2008). Twelve
invasive plant taxa in US western riparian ecosystems.
Journal of the North American Benthological Society,
27(4), 949–966. https://doi.org/10.1899/07-154.1.
Rocchio, J. (2007). Floristic quality ass essment indices for
Colorado plant communities . Fort Collins: Colorado
Natural Heritage Program, Colorado State University.
Rooney, R. C., & Bayley, S. E. (2012). Development and testing of
an index of biotic integrity based on submersed and floating
vegetation and its application to assess reclamation wetlands
in Alberta's oil sands area, Canada. Environmental
Mo
nitoring and Assessment, 184,7 4 9–761.
Rothrock, P . E., Simon, T. P ., & Stewart, P . M. (2008).
Development, calibration, and validation of a littoral zone
plant index of biotic integrity (PIBI) for lacustrine wetlands.
Ecological Indicators, 8(1), 79–88.
Savage, R., Munoz, B., Wenerick, R., Curvin, G., & Moody, B.
(2015). Southeast wetland monitoring and assessment inten-
sification study with North C arolina, South Carolina,
Alabama, and Georgia. Report to USEPA Wetlands
322 Page 26 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322
Program Development. North Carolina: North Carolina
Division of Water Resources.
Spyreas, G. (2016). Scale and sampling effects on floristic quality.
PLoS One, 11(8), e0160693. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0160693.
Stapanian, M. A., Schumacher, W., Gara, B., & Viau, N. (2016).
Mosses in Ohio wetlands respond to indices of disturbance
a n dv a s c u l a rp l a n ti n t e g r i t y .Ecological Indicators, 63,1 1 0–
120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.11.047.
Stevens, D. L., Jr., & Olsen, A. R. (2003). V ariance estimation for
spatially balanced samples of environmental resources.
Environmetrics, 14,5 9 3–610.
Stevens, D. L., Jr., & Olsen, A. R. (2004). Spatially-balanced
sampling of natural resources. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 99 (465), 262 –278. https://doi.
org/10.1198/016214504000000250.
Stoddard, J. L. (2004). Use of ecological regions in aquatic as-
sessments of ecological condition. Environmental
Management, 34,S 6 1–S70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-
003-0193-0.
Stoddard, J. L., Larsen, D. P ., Hawkins, C. P ., Johnson, R. K., &
Norris, R. H. (2006). Setting expectations for the ecological
condition of streams: The concept of reference condition.
Ecological Applications, 16(4), 1267–1276.
Stoddard, J. L., Herlihy, A. T., Peck, D. V ., Hughes, R. M., Whittier,
T. R., & Tarquinio, E. (2008). A process for creating
multimetric indices for large-scale aquatic surveys.Journal of
the North American Benthological Society, 27(4), 878–891.
Swink, F., & Wilhelm, G. (1979).Plants of the Chicago region: a
checklist of the vascular flora of the Chicago region,with
keys, notes on local distribution, ecology, and taxonomy,
and a system for evaluation of plant communities . Lisle:
Morton Arboretum.
USACE (2014). National Wetland Plant List, version 3.2, US Army
Corps of Engineers.http://wetland-plants.usace.army.mil/.
USDA-NRCS (2012). The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.
gov, 23 Jan 2012).
USDA-NRCS (2014). The PLANTS Database (http://plants.usda.
gov, 18 March 2014).
USEP A (2006). Wadeable Streams Assessment: a collaborative
survey of the nation ’s streams. EPA 841-B-06-002.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
USEP A (2009). National Lakes Assessment: a collaborative sur-
vey of the nation ’s lakes. EPA 841-R-09-001. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of
Water and Office of Research and Development.
USEP A (2011a). National Wetland Condition Assessment: field
operations manual. EPA/843/R10/001. Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.epa.
gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/national-wetland-
condition-assessment-2011-field-operations-manual.
USEP A (2011b). National Wetland Condition Assessment: labo-
ratory operations manual. EP A-843-R-10-002. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. https://www.
epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/national-wetland-
condition-assessment-2011-lab-operations-manual.
USE
PA. (2015). National Coastal Condition Assessment 2010
(EP A 841-R-006). Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. Office of Water and Office of Research
and Development.
USEPA (2016a). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Disturbance
Gradient Inputs - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011 Disturbance
Gradient Inputs - Metadata (TXT).[Specific metrics used in this
paper were: metalHeavy_Index, HDIS_HIGH, HDIS_MED,
B1H_AGR, B1H_ALL, B1H_HAB, B1H_HYD, B1H_IND,
B1H_RESURB, XRCOV_ALIENSPP]. Available from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency website: https://www.epa.
gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/data-national-aquatic-
resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016b). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Plant
CC and Native Status V alues - Data (CSV) and NWCA
2011 Plant CC and Native Status V alues - Metadata
(TXT)). [Includes (for observed plant species) state-level trait
information for: C-V alues, Native Status Designations, and
Disturbance Sensitivity Categories]. Available from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency website: https://www.
epa.gov/national-aquatic-res ource-surveys/data-national-
aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEPA (2016c). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Plant
Species Cover and Height - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011
Plant Species Cover and Height - Metadata (TXT)) [Includes
field data for observed plant species: Identity, presence, cover,
and height]. Available from U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency website: https://www.epa.gov /national-aquatic-
resource-surveys/data-national-aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016d). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Plant
T axonomy and Life History - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011
Plant Taxonomy and Life History - Metadata (TXT)).
[Includes (for observed plant species) name and trait infor-
mation: taxonomy, plant category, growth habit, and dura-
tion]. Available from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
website: https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-
surveys/data-national-aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEPA (2016e). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Plant
Wetland Indicator Status - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011 Plant
Wetland Indicator Status - Metadata (TXT)).[Includes regionally
specific wetland indicator status for observed plant species].
Available from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website:
https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/data-
national-aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016f). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Site
Information - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011 Site
Information - Metadata (TXT)). [Specific data used in this
paper: UID, SITE_ID, REF_NWCA, NWCA_WETGRP ,
NWCA_ECO4, ECO_X_WETGRP , AGGR_ECO9_2015,
WGT_11]. Available from U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency website: https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-
resource-surveys/data-national-aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016g). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
W etland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 Trees -
Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011 Trees - Metadata (TXT)).
[Includes field data for: counts of dead trees and snags,
counts of live trees by species and dbh class, cover estimates
of trees by species by height class]. Available from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency website: https://www.
Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322 Page 27 of 28 322
epa.gov/national-aquatic-res ource-surveys/data-national-
aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016h). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011
V egetation Metrics- Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011
V egetation Metrics - Metadata (TXT)). [405 candidate con-
dition metrics were evaluated for this paper]. Available from
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website:
https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/data-
national-aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016i). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011 V egetation
MMI V alues - Data (CSV) and NWCA 2011 V egetation MMI
V alues - Metadata (TXT).[Includes VMMI values, vegetation
condition status, component metric values and metric scores].
Available from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency website:
https://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/data-
national-aquatic-resource-surveys
USEPA (2016j). National Aquatic Resource Surveys. National
Wetland Condition Assessment 2011 (NWCA 2011
V egetation Type and Ground Surface - Data (CSV) and
NWCA 2011 V egetation Type and Ground Surface -
Metadata (TXT)) [Includes field data describing vegetation
structure, non-vascular groups (bryophytes, lichnes, algae),
and ground surface attritibures]. Available from U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency website: https://www.
epa.gov/national-aquatic-res ource-surveys/data-national-
aquatic-resource-surveys.
USEP A (2016k). National Rivers and Streams Assessment 2008-
2009 Technical Report (EPA/841/R-16/008). http://www.
epa.gov/national-aquatic -resource-surveys/nrsa .
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Office of Water and Office of Research and Development.
USEP A (2016l). National Rivers and Streams Assessment 2008-
2009: a collaborative survey (EPA/841/R-16/007).
http://www.epa.gov/national-aquatic-resource-surveys/nrsa.
Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Office of Water and Office of Research and Development.
USEP A (2016m). National Wetland Condition Assessment 2011:
a collaborative survey of the nation’s wetlands. EP A-843-R-
15-005. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/national-
aquatic-resource-surveys/national-wetland-condition-
assessment-2011-results . Washington, DC: US
Environmental Protection Agency.
USEPA (2016n). National Wetland Condition Assessment: 2011
Technical Report. EPA-843-R-15-006. Available from:
https://www.epa.gov/na tional-aquatic-resource-
surveys/national-wetland-condition-assessment-2011-results.
Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency.
V an Sickle, J. (2010). Correlated metrics yield multimetric indices
with inferior performance. Transactions of the American
Fisheries Society, 139,1 8 0 2–1817.
V e s e l k a ,W . ,R e n t c h ,J .S . ,G r a f t o n ,W .N . ,K o r d e k ,W .S . ,&A n d e r s o n ,
J. T. (2010). Using two classification schemes to develop vege-
tation indices of biological integrity for wetlands in West Virginia,
USA.Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 170,5 5 5–569.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-009-1257-2.
W h i t t i e r ,T .R . ,H u g h e s ,R .M . ,S t o d d a r d ,J .L . ,L o m n i c k y ,G .L . ,P e c k ,D .
V ., & Herlihy, A. T. (2007). A structured approach for developing
indices of biotic intergrity: three examples from streams and rivers
in Western USA.Transactions of the American Fisheries Society,
136, 718–735.https://doi.org/10.1577/T06-128.1.
Wilhelm, G., & Ladd, D. (1988). Natural area assessment in the
Chicago region. In Transactions 53rd North American
Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference (pp. 361 –37 5).
Louisville, Kentucky, USA: Wildlife Management Institute,
Washington, DC, USA.
Wilson, M., Bayley, S., & Rooney, R. (2013). A plant-based index
of biological integrity in permanent marsh wetlands yields
consistent scores in dry and wet years.Aquatic Conservation:
Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 23(5), 698–709.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
322 Page 28 of 28 Environ Monit Assess (2019) 191(Suppl 1): 322