Impact of biochar amendment on improving nutrient availability and stress resilience for sustainable crop production | Discover Agriculture | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Impact of biochar amendment on improving nutrient availability and stress resilience for sustainable crop production 
 
 
 Review 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 02 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Volume 4 , article number  275 ( 2026 )
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Impact of biochar amendment on improving nutrient availability and stress resilience for sustainable crop production
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tanvi Bhatia  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8814-9859 1 , Shikha Mehta  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2134-1456 2 & Satyavir S. Sindhu  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2801-9139 2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 829 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Biochar is a stable, carbon rich by product obtained from pyrolysis of agricultural biomass and its amendment in soil represents a promising ecofriendly frontier in sustainable crop production. Production of biochar using various pyrolysis techniques offers a sustainable strategy for management of agricultural residues, forestry wastes, and other organic materials. Amendment of biochar (BC) in the soil improves soil structure and nutrient retention while serving as a supportive habitat for colonization of beneficial microbial communities that enhance nutrient availability and nutrient use efficiency, resulting in reduced fertilizer dependency of crop plants. Moreover, application of biochar has also emerged as a successful approach for boosting soil carbon sequestration, immobilization of heavy metals and organic pollutants, and in mitigation of greenhouse gases, thus contributing to ecological environment protection. Biochar is currently also gaining attention as a potentially valuable input for mitigating the impact of climate change-induced abiotic and biotic stresses in agriculture. In addition, fertilization with biochar alone or combined treatment with organic matter and/or beneficial microbes represents a promising approach in sustainable crop production in nutrient deficient soils under diverse agroecological conditions. However, the effectiveness of biochar varies with feedstock type, pyrolysis conditions and soil-crop-climate interactions. Therefore, tailored approaches considering all these factors are essential to maximize the benefits from biochar amendment. This review highlights current knowledge and technological challenges by linking fundamental mechanisms with applied outcomes for translating biochar-microbial innovations into commercially viable, environmentally sustainable and climate-resilient agricultural systems. Graphical Abstract Highlights 
 
 
 
 Biochar production is a sustainable strategy for management of agricultural residues. 
 
 
 Soil fertility and nutrient use efficiency are improved by biochar application. 
 
 
 Biochar alters microbial community in soil and alleviates environmental stresses. 
 
 
 Biochar treatment boosts carbon sequestration and mitigates green house gases. 
 
 
 Plant growth and crop yields are increased by biochar amendment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biochar as a Soil amendment: implications for soil health, carbon sequestration, and climate resilience
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 03 March 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biochar for Food Security and Environmental Sustainability Under Current Climate Change Scenario
 
 
 
 Chapter 
 
 © 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biochar-Mediated Soil Amendment for Sustainable Agriculture
 
 
 
 Chapter 
 
 © 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Biofortification 
 
 
 
 Crop waste 
 
 
 
 Subsistence Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Agricultural Biotechnology 
 
 
 
 Soil Chemistry 
 
 
 
 Biochar Applications in Soil Enhancement and Remediation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1 Introduction A major worldwide concern in today’s scenario is maintaining agricultural food production as the world's population continues to grow. Under current intensive agricultural practices, safeguarding its most precious resource “soil” is a formidable challenge, since soil nutrients and organic matter (OM) are being rapidly depleted [ 1 , 2 ]. The challenge is further compounded by an impending climate change issue, as evidenced by rising temperatures [ 3 ], atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) levels [ 4 ], and extreme weather events like droughts [ 5 , 6 , 7 ]. These factors further put agricultural production systems under pressure [ 8 , 9 , 10 ]. Under such circumstances, modern agriculture must constantly develop and adapt novel agri-technologies in order to maximize agricultural output and resource usage efficiency, while reducing the adverse environmental consequences caused by use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides in farming [ 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ]. Agricultural and environmental sustainability is also threatened by generating a huge amount of organic wastes (OWs) through the global agricultural production systems [ 15 , 16 ]. Several technologies including composting, vermi-composting, anaerobic digestion, production of biochar and organic phytostimulants etc. are involved in the biodegradation and management of organic wastes [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 ]. Different indigenous and/or introduced organisms such as bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa, nematodes and arthropods contribute in biological decomposition process of these agricultural wastes [ 21 , 22 , 23 ]. However, conversion of agricultural bio-waste into biochar is at the leading edge of material innovation to solve environmental challenges, impending climate change issues, and global food insecurity because of its transdisciplinary application potential [ 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 ]. Biochar is formed through thermo-chemical processes by pyrolyzing OWs, such as plant left-overs and crop residues (CRs) under high heat in a deoxygenated atmosphere [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 ]. This process converts organic carbon (C) in biomass into a stable form of char with a long half-life that means C is retained in a solid state [ 33 , 34 ]. This helps to reduce the amount of C released into the atmosphere, contributing to mitigate global warming [ 30 , 35 ]. The term "biochar" is indeed derived from Greek word. The word "bio" comes from "bios," meaning life, and "char" is derived from "charcoal," which is the product of the carbonization of biomass. The credit for coining the term "biochar" is generally attributed to Dr. Johannes Lehmann, a soil scientist, and his colleagues. They popularized the term in the early 2000s, when they began researching the use of charcoal in agriculture and soil improvement. While Peter Read has been involved in advocating for biochar plantations, the term itself is more closely associated with the scientific community studying its applications in agriculture and environmental sustainability [ 36 ]. The production of biochar through the pyrolysis of crop straw and CRs, and its amendment in soil has been suggested globally as an effective counter measure to increase soil organic carbon (SOC) stock, improve soil fertility, enhance ecosystem functioning and for mitigating the effects of climate change on agriculture [ 37 , 38 , 39 ]. High C recalcitrance against microbial decay caused by biochar amendment in croplands slowed the turnover of organic carbon [ 40 ]. It also indirectly reduces the amount of nitrogen (N) required for crop production through improved N use efficiency, which may have a negative impact on the indirect greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the N fertilizer industry [ 31 , 41 ]. Biochar has several positive impacts on soil quality as well as fertility and it can directly add nutrients to the soil [ 42 , 43 ], providing a source of essential elements for plant growth, and help adjusting in soil pH [ 44 , 45 ], which is crucial for optimal plant growth. Biochar amendment enhances soil porosity [ 46 ], improves water retention and drainage, and can increase the soil's cation exchange capacity [ 47 ], which affects nutrient availability to plants. Thus, addition of biochar enhances the availability of nutrients, not only by directly supplying N, P, and K [ 48 ], but also by reducing nutrient leaching and by stabilizing soil nutrient levels [ 49 ]. Thus, biochar has gained increasing attention recently due to its potential to address environmental and agricultural issues [ 50 , 51 ]. The effectiveness of biochar as a soil amendment is strongly influenced by its properties and structure. The feedstock type (the source material for biochar production) and the conditions under which biochar is produced through pyrolysis have significant impact on its characteristics. Feedstocks like woody residues generally produce biochar that is more stable, with a larger surface area and a higher porosity, while biochar made from manure or crop residues usually contains more nutrients but have lower structural stability [ 52 ]. High pyrolysis temperatures are reported to increase biochar surface area which in turn can contribute to the biochar's effectiveness in soil amendments [ 53 , 54 , 55 ]. The large surface area of biochar provides binding sites that can retain and exchange nutrients in the soil as the enhanced surface area can contribute to increased availability of macro-nutrients in the soil [ 56 ]. The binding sites on biochar can hold onto nutrients, preventing them from leaching away and making them more accessible to plants. High pyrolysis temperatures are associated with excellent stability of biochar in the environment, suggesting its resistance to degradation [ 57 , 58 , 59 ]. Moreover, higher pyrolysis temperatures are also linked to higher pH and increased mineral nutrient contents in biochar, which can have positive effects on soil properties and fertility [ 60 ]. But, biochar produced at high temperatures tends to have lower N content in some cases and may exhibit lower nutrient availability for plant uptake [ 61 , 62 ]. The high porosity of biochar creates a physical environment that serves as a refuge for beneficial soil microorganisms [ 17 ]. This structure can provide a protective space away from potential disturbances caused by factors like grazing animals. Stimulation of beneficial microorganisms due to biochar amendments in field soil play a crucial role in soil health and fertility by contributing to nutrient cycling, OM decomposition, abiotic stress resilience and disease suppression [ 38 , 39 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 ]. So far, several research articles and reviews have been published that discuss various approaches used for OWs management and application of these agri-technologies in crop production [ 15 , 19 , 70 ]. Despite the well-established benefits of biochar for improving soil health, there is a lack of comprehensive studies examining its combined effects with beneficial microbes on different biological processes including nutrient release, stress resilience, mitigation of pollution, plant growth and crop production (although see, [ 51 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 71 , 72 ]), and only few findings and technologies have been translated into the field. Recently, some studies have reviewed the technology and strategies of biochar production emphasizing the qualitative properties of varying feedstocks, their effect on quantitative yield, and highlighting their environmental applications including C sequestration, greenhouse gas emissions and economic impacts [ 25 , 72 , 73 , 74 ]. Application of biochar have also been reported to significantly enhance the nutrients in the rhizosphere and it reduced the bioavailability of heavy metals (HMs), and acted in environmental rehabilitation for remediating contaminated soil [ 27 , 54 , 55 , 75 , 76 ]. A broad overview has been provided in this manuscript about the different strategies employed for biochar production from various OWs, and the recent advancements about using biochar in enhancing nutrient release and soil fertility, in remediation of organic pollutants and in reducing GHG emissions for environmental sustainability. Furthermore, the review highlighted the importance and feasiblity of modifying biochar-soil-microbiomes-plant interactions to maximize their synergies for increasing nutrient availability leading to stimulation of plant growth and increasing the crop yields for food security. In addition, this review highlights the necessity of utilizing biochar as organic fertilizer for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), such as zero hunger, poverty, and climate change mitigation by enhancing farm productivity. However, further in depth studies are needed to explore the implications of biochar in bioremediation of pollutants and heavy metals, and mitigation of abiotic and biotic stresses. 2 Agro-residues used for biochar production Biochar, as a carbon-rich material produced from organic waste biomass, has gained significant attention due to its versatile applications in agriculture and potential environmental benefits [ 74 , 75 , 77 , 78 ]. It is produced by a pyrolysis process involving the thermal decomposition of biomass (plants, food waste, and animal waste) [ 17 , 79 , 80 , 81 ]. Lignocellulosic biomass (LB) such as rice husk, cassava stem, rhizome, sugarcane bagasse, corncob, wood, and wood chips can be used to produce biochar [ 50 , 82 , 83 , 84 ]. LB is a widely available and renewable resource on earth and its composition varies based on factors like plant type, growth conditions, plant part, and age at harvesting [ 85 , 86 , 87 , 88 ]. 2.1 Crop waste/residues Increasing crop productivity needed to meet the increased food demand for exponentially rising global population has caused significant increases in crop residues (CRs). The annual total production of crops has surged to 4800 million tons, according to the Food and Agricultural Organization [ 89 ]. This surge inevitably contributes to a higher volume of CRs, which are the remnants left in the field after harvesting, and can be utilized for various purposes, including bio-based materials, fuels, and energy [ 20 , 90 ]. However, the conventional methods of disposing of these CRs, particularly for land preparation, have led to environmental issues including release of significant amount of pollutants in the air that in turn, can have adverse effects on human health as well as loss of nutrients through leaching or volatilization [ 15 ]. While CRs have the potential to serve various beneficial purposes such as livestock feed, plant nutrient reservoirs, and C sources for soil improvement, the prevalent practice of in situ incineration of CRs worldwide poses environmental challenges. This incineration leads to the release of various gaseous pollutants, including nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), carbon monoxide (CO), ozone, fine particles, as well as GHG like CO 2 and methane (CH 4 ) [ 18 , 91 ]. In addition, the in situ burning of CRs has negative consequences for soil health and nutrient cycling [ 92 ]. It prevents effective nutrient recycling, results in the loss of C in the soil, and can harm soil microbial communities. To effectively address these challenges, it is crucial to develop specific processes tailored to the characteristics of each type of CRs. The variation in generation quantity, as well as the chemical and physical properties of different CRs, necessitates the implementation of customized approaches for their utilization and disposal. This highlights the need for sustainable and environmentally friendly alternatives to the traditional disposal methods of CRs, taking into account the potential benefits these residues can offer to agriculture and soil health [ 16 , 70 ]. Efforts to find innovative ways to manage CRs, such as exploring bio-based materials, energy production, or other sustainable utilization methods, can help address the environmental challenges associated with their disposal and contribute to more sustainable agricultural practices [ 15 , 21 , 75 ]. It's important to recognize that the types and quantities of CRs generated can vary significantly from one location or country to another, as shown in Table  1 . The major CRs utilized for production of compost, biochar, fuels and energy are enlisted in this section. Table 1 Agricultural wastes generated by different countries [ 93 ] Full size table 2.1.1 Sugarcane bagasse Sugarcane bagasse is a fiber waste generated during the extraction of sugarcane. It is produced at a rate of approximately 250–280 kg per ton of processed sugarcane. This results in a substantial annual production of nearly 500 million tons of sugarcane bagasse globally. Brazil is a major contributor to sugarcane cultivation, accounting for approximately 41% of the total [ 94 ]. Biochar was synthesized from sugarcane bagasse and corncob using a vacuum pyrolyzer, to harness its possible potential applications for sustainable agricultural and environmental solutions [ 95 ]. Biochar with porous structures was created in a slow pyrolyzer at three temperature ranges. The pyrolysis temperature had a negative effect on biochar yield and reduced from 30.21 to 25.4% and 34.59 to 24.28% as the pyrolysis temperature increased from 500 to 700 °C for corncob and sugarcane bagasse, respectively. The biochar formations were discovered to possess a higher proportion of elemental carbon (90–91%) compared to their original state (43.9–45.2%). 2.1.2 Corn stover Corn stover encompasses various plant parts such as leaves, stalks, and cobs, remaining in the field after corn harvesting [ 96 ]. It is considered as a sustainable material for biorefineries due to its abundance and low cost. The generation of corn stover is estimated at 1 kg per kilogram of corn grain. This leads to a substantial global annual production of approximately 1162 million tons of corn stover. The United States is the world's largest producer of corn stover, followed by China and Brazil. 2.1.3 Wheat straw Generally, straw output can be calculated based on the grain-to-straw ratio. The output of wheat straw is 0.86 that can be correlated with its generation. This ratio implies that nearly 650 million tons of wheat straw is generated worldwide annually. China is the leading country in wheat production, followed by India, the United States, and Russia. The combined share of wheat straw production in these four countries exceeds 45%. 2.1.4 Rice straw The production ratios of rice straw vary from 0.7 to 1.5. On an average, the annual production of rice straw is reported to be about 730 million tons [ 16 , 97 ]. China and India are the leading countries in rice production, and their combined share of world rice straw production is 50%. These figures underscore the substantial amounts of straw generated globally, particularly from major cereal crops like wheat and rice. The grain-to-straw ratio provides a useful metric for estimating straw output and understanding the potential availability of this agricultural residue. Efficient management and utilization of wheat and rice straw can contribute to sustainable agricultural practices, including the production of bio-based materials, fuels and energy [ 18 , 85 ]. Additionally, understanding the leading countries in straw production highlights regions where innovative strategies for straw utilization and disposal can have a significant impact. Efficiently converting crop residues like sugarcane bagasse and corn stover into valuable products can contribute to addressing environmental concerns associated with traditional disposal methods while also providing economic and sustainable solutions, especially in countries with large agricultural outputs. 2.2 Chemical composition of crop residues The chemical composition of CRs is a critical factor in determining its suitability for various thermochemical conversion processes. CRs mainly consist of cellulose: 28–48 wt%, hemicellulose: 19–38 wt%, lignin: 12–32 wt% and others: 2–24 wt% [ 33 , 98 , 99 ]. These percentages vary depending on factors such as crop species, cultivation conditions, location, and age of crop plants [ 94 ]. Proximate analysis of CRs helps to understand the basic composition of the material and is particularly important for the use of biomass for energy or biochar production [ 38 , 39 ]. It typically includes the determination of moisture content, volatile matter, fixed C, and ash content [ 100 ]. For biochar production from CRs, a higher fixed C content is often desirable. This is because fixed carbon represents the C that can potentially be converted into stable biochar, contributing to the C sequestration properties of biochar [ 38 , 39 , 101 , 102 ]. This can be valuable in optimizing biochar production processes. CRs with higher volatile matter content are more easily applicable to combustion processes [ 103 ]. This characteristic is essential for understanding the combustibility and energy release potential during thermochemical conversion. Understanding these components and their variations allows for more targeted and efficient utilization of CRs in various processes such as biochar production and combustion. Additionally, the chemical composition analysis provides insights into the potential applications of different crop residues in the context of sustainable energy production and bio-based materials. 2.3 Biochar production from agricultural biomass waste Lignocellulosic agricultural biomass waste (ABW) serves as an excellent source of bioenergy and it is inexpensive, sustainable, renewable, and readily available [ 104 , 105 , 106 ]. Additionally, the diverse applications of ABW in various industries, from mechanical recycling to biofuel production, underscore its potential as a sustainable and renewable resource [ 107 , 108 ]. ABW can be utilized through mechanical recycling, fermentation, and thermochemical conversion. Biomass is primarily composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. These components undergo different reactions such as carbonization and decomposition during pyrolysis under various conditions [ 86 , 109 ]. Due to the distinct chemical structures of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, the resulting biochar exhibits differences in structure based on the precursor material. Lignin, having a complex structure with benzene rings and phenolic polymers [ 99 ], undergoes decomposition in a wider temperature range of 250 °C to 500 °C and it has been observed that biomass with higher lignin content tends to result in a higher biochar yield during pyrolysis. Cellulose, with better thermal stability than hemicellulose, decomposes at temperatures between 350 and 375 °C [ 110 ], whereas hemicellulose, being a polymer with a branched structure and short side chains, easily undergoes pyrolysis at temperatures ranging from 200 to 350 °C [ 111 ]. In the past, charcoal was a commonly used fuel for heating, and it was produced through wood biomass pyrolysis. Pyrolysis is a process where organic materials, such as wood, are heated in the absence of oxygen to produce charcoal, along with other by products like tar and gases. However, the old pyrolysis technology had several drawbacks, including low energy efficiency, slow production, and high levels of air pollution [ 112 ]. There are primarily six methods used for transformation of ABW such as torrefaction, pyrolysis, combustion, hydrothermal liquefaction, gasification and thermo-chemical conversion to biofuels (Fig.  1 ; Table  2 ). Fig. 1 Full size image Methods used for conversion of agricultural biomass waste into products. Torrefaction involves a mild thermal treatment (200–300 °C) in the absence of oxygen that produces a coal-like solid fuel and improves energy density as well as makes biomass easier to store and transport. Pyrolysis is heating of biomass without oxygen at higher temperatures. Combustion involves direct burning of biomass in the presence of oxygen. Hydrothermal liquefaction process involves high pressure and moderate temperature using water. Gasification is the partial oxidation of biomass at high temperatures and syngas is produced, where as Thermochemical conversion involves conversion to biomass to bioethanol, biodiesel etc Table 2 Methods of transformation of agricultural biomass waste into valuable products Full size table Pyrolysis techniques are effective in the production of biochar. Different forms of pyrolysis exist: (i) rapid pyrolysis, (ii) ultra-quick/flash pyrolysis, and (iii) conventional/slow pyrolysis, (iv) vacuum pyrolysis, (v) intermediate pyrolysis, (vi) hydropyrolysis, and (vii) microwave assisted pyrolysis; based on operational characteristics including heating rate, pyrolysis temperature, and residence time. The solid material is usually modified via gradual pyrolysis to reduce the amount of oil generated. The amount of gases and oil generated is maximized by quick and ultra-fast (flash) pyrolysis. Rapid pyrolysis carried out at moderate to high heating rate causes thermal breakdown of carbonaceous materials in the absence of oxygen. It is the most widely used approach in both practical application and research with bio-oil as the major product. These processes are important in the context of biomass conversion and biofuel production, with each having its advantages and applications based on the yields of desired product and process characteristics. In conventional pyrolysis, the heating rate and residence times are not specified, suggesting a relatively slower process compared to ultra-fast pyrolysis. Ultra-fast pyrolysis mainly produces gases and bio-oil, with a significantly higher percentage of gases compared to conventional pyrolysis [ 116 ]. The yield of liquid condensates in ultra-fast pyrolysis is lower than in conventional pyrolysis. Slow pyrolysis is used for solid material modification with minimized bio-oil production. The temperature at which biochar is produced also affects mineralization and immobilization processes, for example, biochar formed at lower temperatures (250 °C–400°C) tends to encourage mineralization, whereas high temperature biochar (525 °C–650°C) is more conducive to long-term carbon storage and these variations were due to the structural changes caused by pyrolysis processes [ 117 ]. 2.3.1 Conventional/slow pyrolysis Slow pyrolysis is characterized by a long residence time, exceeding one hour. During this process, biomass is heated at temperatures ranging between 300 and 600 °C, with a gradual heating rate of 5–7 °C/min [ 118 , 119 , 120 ]. The slow heating rate and extended residence time create an environment conducive to secondary reactions. Secondary reactions refer to chemical transformations that occur after the initial pyrolysis step, contributing to the development of biochar. The prolonged residence period facilitates the evacuation of vapours generated during these secondary reactions. In this process, the primary product biochar accounts for 35–45% of the overall products [ 121 ], bio-oil constitutes 25–35% of the products, and syngas accounts for 20–30% of the by-products [ 122 , 123 ]. 2.3.2 Rapid/fast pyrolysis Fast pyrolysis is a direct thermochemical process that rapidly converts solid biomass into liquid bio-oil. It is conducted in the absence of O 2 , at temperatures above 500 °C, and with a high heating rate of over 300 °C/min. Fast pyrolysis is designed to take biomass to temperatures where thermal cracking occurs rapidly, minimizing exposure time [ 124 ]. This approach supports efficient biochar production while emphasizing the liquid bio-oil as a primary output [ 125 , 126 ]. The process typically yields 60–70% bio-oil, 15–20% biochar, and 10–20% syngas [ 127 , 128 , 129 ]. This distribution makes it a versatile method for obtaining liquid biofuels, solid biochar for soil improvement and syngas for potential energy applications. 2.3.3 Flash/ultra-quick pyrolysis Flash pyrolysis is presented as an enhanced and modified version of fast pyrolysis, characterized by extremely rapid biomass decomposition. The process is conducted at temperatures between 900 and 1200 °C, reaching these temperatures in less than one second (typically between 0.1 and 1 s) [ 130 , 131 ]. The rapid decomposition of biomass and short exposure to high temperatures result in a swift vaporization and collection of bio-oil. The rapid nature of the process may limit the formation of solid carbonaceous biochar. 2.3.4 Vacuum pyrolysis Thermal decomposition of biomass is carried out under vacuum or relatively low pressure in an isolated O 2 environment [ 132 , 133 ]. Vacuum pyrolysis is carried out under reduced pressure, typically in the range of 0.5 to 2 bar (0.05–0.2 MPa), and at controlled temperatures maintained between 450 and 600 °C [ 134 ]. The effective evacuation of vapours is made to minimize residence time and prevent secondary reactions. 2.3.5 Intermediate pyrolysis Intermediate pyrolysis integrates aspects of both slow- and fast- pyrolysis processes. This combination is chosen when there is a need to balance the production of solid (char) and liquid products. Slow pyrolysis is known for efficiently producing large amounts of char but results in lower amounts of liquid products. Conversely, fast pyrolysis is more effective at producing liquid products but generates less char. Thus, intermediate pyrolysis aims to strike a balance between these two extremes. The process is typically conducted at a pressure of 1 bar, with temperatures ranging between 500 and 650 °C. Heating rates fall between 0.1 and 10 °C/min, and the residence time is in the range of 5 to 17 min [ 135 ]. Intermediate pyrolysis conditions are designed to prevent the synthesis of high molecular reactive tars. This contributes to the production of dry biochar suitable for agricultural purposes or for direct use in boilers and engines [ 136 ]. 2.3.6 Hydropyrolysis Hydropyrolysis involves the conversion of biomass by injecting hydrogen or hydrogen-based materials into a reactor under high pressure. The pressure typically ranges from 50 to 200 bar [ 133 , 137 ]. The operational conditions for hydropyrolysis include a heating rate of 10–300 °C/s, a residence time of over 15 s, and a temperature ranging from 350 to 600 °C [ 138 ]. These conditions are comparable to those of fast pyrolysis, making hydropyrolysis a special type of fast pyrolysis under high-pressure conditions with the introduction of hydrogen. This process reduces the O 2 content in the bio-oils produced, simultaneously inhibiting the production of biochar. Therefore, hydropyrolysis is not considered ideal for biochar production [ 139 , 140 ]. 2.3.7 Microwave-assisted pyrolysis (MAP) This is the most appropriate pyrolysis technique available because it uses volumetric heating to convert ABW into biochar [ 141 ]. This technique involves the use of microwaves to uniformly heat the entire volume of a material, whether it's a solid, suspension, or liquid. Unlike conventional heating methods that rely on radiation, conduction, and convection, volumetric microwave heating converts microwave energy into thermal energy throughout the material's volume [ 142 , 143 , 144 ]. During microwave assisted pyrolysis, materials are heated using electromagnetic waves rather than hot surfaces [ 145 ]. This approach minimizes thermal damage to the treated materials. Additionally, it allows for the heating of larger volumes of viscous materials without affecting the product flow rate through the microwave heating chamber, reducing fouling issues [ 146 ]. In microwave heating, the higher the temperature of the final product, the slower the flow [ 147 ]. Overall, volumetric microwave heating presents a modern and efficient alternative to traditional thermal processing methods, offering benefits such as uniform energy distribution, reduced thermal damage, and the ability to handle viscous materials effectively on an industrial scale. 2.4 Production of functional biochar for agricultural sustainability The production and designing of functional biochar from agricultural biomass wastes is a promising avenue with potential benefits for both agriculture and environmental sustainability [ 148 , 149 , 150 ]. The biochar production also helps in reducing reliance on chemical fertilizers and controls the in situ burning of crop waste as shown in Fig.  2 [ 151 ]. For designing functional biochar from wastes, Han et al. [ 152 ] explored the effects of FeCl 3 and AlCl 3 addition to two typical biomass wastes (rice straw and poultry litter) during pyrochar and hydrochar production. The addition of Al (III) facilitated the carbonization of 250 °C pyrochar, but suppressed that of hydrochar and 450 °C pyrochar. The addition of Fe (III) enhanced the formation of aromatic structures of both pyrochar and hydrochar, but reduced the abundance of lignin- and condensed aromatics-like species in their dissolved organic C fractions. Furthermore, Fe (III) increased the stability and adsorption efficiency of pyrochar and hydrochar for both polar and nonpolar contaminants. Thus, functional biochar may be designed from biomass wastes with high stability and adsorption efficiency for organic contaminants. Fig. 2 Full size image Biochar production from crop residues and its benefits in agriculture and environment. There are mainly two possible pathways for management of crop residues: Traditional practice involves burning of crop residues and other sustainable alternative is its conversion to valuable products (valorization). Burning of crop residues in the traditional practice has several negative impacts that include greenhouse gas emission, air pollution and release of aerosols and particulate matter. In sustainable alternative crop residues are converted to some useful products. One such alternative includes pyrolysis of waste to produce biochar, which is carbon-rich material and its amendment in soil improves nutrient cycling, increases soil fertility, helps in mitigation of climate change by reducing emission of greenhouse gases In another experiment, the effect of pyrolysis temperature was evaluated systematically on the structure of biochar prepared from crop straw obtained from three crops (cotton, alfalfa, and wheat) [ 76 ]. It was observed that higher pyrolysis temperature increased aromatization and graphitization degree of BC, and established a relationship of pyrolysis temperature with surface properties of biochar such as functional groups and carbonization degree. In addition, the content, composition, and functional group evolution of BC-derived dissolved organic matter was controlled by the pyrolysis temperature. However, pyrolysis concentrated the amount of potentially toxic elements (PTEs) in BC, but the potential risk of PTEs significantly decreased in biochar. The BC prepared at 500 °C showed the highest spin concentration of persistent free radicals. In a recent study, Malik and Laura [ 153 ] prepared biochar using agro-residues (rice husk-RH, cotton stalk-CS, orange peel-OP and sugarcane bagasse-SB) and assessed the physico-chemical characteristics as well as functional groups of biochar synthesized at 450 °C for 2 h. Elemental analysis revealed that pyrolysis led to increased C content and reduced O 2 levels across the samples. The highest C concentration was observed in CS biochar (66.30%), while SB biochar showed the lowest C concentration (19.39%). Moreover, CS biochar exhibited the highest hydrogen-to-carbon (H/C) and oxygen-to-carbon ratio (O/C) molar ratios indicating greater aromaticity and thermal stability. These characteristics make CS biochar suitable for soil improvement and carbon sequestration. Recently, a sustainable and cost-effective technology was developed to prepare biochar-based slow-release fertilizer (BSRF) through the co-pyrolysis of wheat straw (WS), bentonite and nutrient solution containing KH 2 PO 4 and KNO 3 [ 154 ]. The resulting materials exhibited biochar yields of 44.6–56.3%, pH values between 7.6 and 8.6, and C:N ratios of 7.9–22.7. Soil incubation study at 35 days demonstrated that the respective release of NO 3 -N, PO 4 3− , and K + ranged from 43.2 to 59.4%, 22.7 to 66.8%, and 52.1 to 69.5%. The BSRF prepared with 30% bentonite at 350 °C pyrolysis demonstrated the best slow-release behaviour in soil. In another study, effects of pyrolysis temperature and the chemical characteristics of lignocellulosic biomass were evaluated on the release of hazardous volatile organic compounds (HVOCs) from biochar [ 155 ]. The lowest release of HVOCs was associated with temperatures 350–425 °C and elevated carbon-relative molar mass (CRMM) index. Results provided a new approach to consider both process and substrate parameters for evaluating the safety of biochar in the context of environmental and human health protection. 3 Effect of biochar amendments on soil health Soil pollution is identified as one of the main environmental problems worldwide. The primary contributors to soil contamination are identified as chemical fertilizers, pesticides, mineral oil and heavy metals (HMs), which are contributing around 60% to soil contamination in the European Union [ 156 ]. Application of organic amendments, particularly biochar derived from the transformation of biomass residues through pyrolysis is a valuable alternative for restoring degraded soils [ 157 , 158 ]. The rehabilitation strategy involving organic amendments is noted to enhance various soil properties, including both physical and chemical properties, nutritional value, water holding capacity (WHC) and other essential parameters of soil that indirectly influence the sorption and complexation of metals in contaminated soils [ 75 ]. Many tropical and subtropical soils face severe fertility depletion due to excess nutrient mining and reduction in soil organic matter (SOM). The application of biochar is considered as an innovative solution to address the complex issues of soil quality and agricultural productivity [ 159 , 160 ]. Biochar addition is noted for its ability to modulate soil biology, chemistry, and physical properties, and also to work efficiently in acidic and deteriorated coarse-textured soils. The effectiveness of biochar application may vary depending on the specific characteristics of the soil. The optimum application is suggested to have the potential to improve soil conditions, reduce GHG emissions, and immobilize toxic metals and other organic pollutants [ 161 ]. Despite its potential benefits, some adverse effects of biochar have been recognized at higher doses [ 162 ]. Studies indicate that there is a specific threshold beyond which additional biochar application becomes detrimental on plant growth or other parameters [ 163 ]. Furtado et al. [ 164 ] conducted studies on sunflower ( Helianthus annus L.) and observed a reduction in plant height when the rate of poultry biochar exceeded 5%. Similarly, Rajkovich et al. [ 165 ] found that the growth of corn was negatively impacted when the rate of food waste biochar was increased beyond 7%. In both cases, an increase in the rate of biochar application led to a reduction in plant growth, indicating that there might be an optimal or safe range for biochar application that should not be exceeded. Thus, the rate of biochar application is crucial, and exceeding certain thresholds may have adverse effects on plant growth [ 166 ]. The recommended biochar application rates vary greatly depending on soil type, crop system and biochar characteristics. Applying biochar at a rate of 8 tons per hectare gives an internal rate of return of 85.71% and a benefit–cost ratio of 1.476 [ 167 ]. This biochar application rate provides a balance between cost and agronomic benefits such as improved soil health and crop yield and reduced need for chemical fertilizers. Most studies report beneficial effects of biochar in the range of 5–20 t ha −1 , however, rates exceeding 20 t ha −1 are not economically feasible and may result in negative effects such as nutrient imbalance, increased soil alkalinity and reduced availability of micronutrients [ 167 , 168 ]. This highlights the importance of considering the appropriate dosage and application methods to avoid negative consequences. 3.1 Effect of biochar on physical and chemical properties of soil The porous structure of biochar, its large surface area, water holding capacity and content of nutrients improves physico-chemical properties and biological health of soil (Fig.  3 ). Biochar generally reduces bulk density in soils. This is beneficial because lower bulk density indicates increased soil porosity, which refers to the volume of pore space in the soil. This increased porosity improves water infiltration and retention reducing the risk of drought stress for plants, promoting better drainage and reducing the risk of water logging. The reduction in bulk density and alteration of soil porosity by biochar contributes to increased plant productivity [ 169 ]. The porous structure of biochar helps create a more open soil matrix, reducing soil compaction, which can impede root growth and nutrient uptake by plants. Biochar can serve as a habitat for beneficial microorganisms due to its porous structure that can positively influence soil microbial activity, leading to improved soil health and nutrient cycling. Biochar can improve soil hydraulic conductivity, facilitating better water movement through the soil profile that assist in preventing surface runoff and erosion. Biochar can influence soil colour due to its inherent dark color. This effect is generally more pronounced in lighter-colored soils. The dark color of biochar can enhance soil warming by absorbing and retaining solar radiation, which may be beneficial for certain crops and in cooler climates. Fig. 3 Full size image Factors affecting colonization of microorganisms in biochar. The figure explains several factors that affect the colonization of microorganisms in biochar. Each factor plays a significant role in determining how effectively microorganisms can attach, grow and thrive in biochar. Due to porous structure, biochar offers protected habitats for microorganisms, shield them from predation and environmental stress. Larger surface area of biochar increases the number of sites available for microbial attachment. Biochar contains various nutrients, which serves as a nutrient reservoir for microorganisms. Biochar surface undergoes physical, chemical and biological weathering (during ageing) that increases the hydrophilicity and nutrient retention in biochar. Furthermore, biochar’s ability to retain water provides a moist microenvironment for microbes that provides the microorganisms the adequate moisture and dissolved nutrients even during dry conditions The effects of biochar on soil physical properties can vary depending on the type of biochar, feedstock, application rate, and specific soil and climate conditions [ 162 , 170 , 171 , 172 ]. Biochar can alter the size and distribution of soil pores, leading to a shift towards relatively smaller pore sizes, which is beneficial for crop growth and development. The impact of biochar on hydraulic conductivity is noted to be more significant in sandy soils compared to clay soils [ 160 , 173 ]. For instance, sandy soils experience more significant changes in hydraulic conductivity compared to clay soils [ 174 ]. In sandy soil, biochar application significantly reduces saturated hydraulic conductivity due to enhanced water retention in a single layer that contributes to better water availability for plants in sandy soils. The type of feedstock used for biochar preparation can influence water holding capacity. Woody feedstocks generally have higher WHC than lignocellulosic and herbaceous feedstocks, attributed to greater pore space. Garbuz et al. [ 175 ] reported that adding biochar (1% w/w) made from willow wood produced at low 350 °C temperature to the two contrasting soils i.e., a sil-andic Andosol and a dystric Cambisol pasture soils positively affected the soil structure, decreased soil bulk density, improved nutrient cycling (soil total N and Olsen P content), enhanced microbial biomass C, and increased root biomass in the soil. In a study carried out by Oyeyiola and Ogunlaran [ 176 ], the properties of biochar derived from sawdust and Tithonia diversifolia weed at different pyrolysis temperatures (350 and 450 °C) and with or without the addition of poultry manure were compared. The study focused on liming efficiencies, macronutrient enrichment, and C sequestration potentials in acid soil. Biochar derived from Tithonia diversifolia weed had higher pH, ash, basic cations, N and P contents, whereas sawdust-derived biochars had higher organic C content. The inclusion of poultry manure in the feedstock improved liming efficiency and increased macronutrient enrichment potentials for all biochars. The performance was notably better at a pyrolysis temperature of 450 °C. The study compared the properties of biochar with those of conventional CaCO 3 (calcium carbonate) in acid soil. All the biochars were found to have comparatively high liming efficiencies as that of conventional CaCO 3 but outperformed CaCO 3 in their macronutrient enrichment, C sequestration and cowpea seedling root parameters enhancement. Soil chemical properties are also crucial indicators of sustainability in crop production [ 177 ]. The nutrient status of the soil and the crop acquisition pattern are dependent on these properties. The period following the green revolution has resulted in multi-nutrient deficiencies in the soil due to the continuous overuse of fertilizers [ 178 ]. Biochar serves as an innovative nutrient management option to enhance soil nutrient effectiveness and efficiencyto benefit plants by providing a continuous flow of nutrients. In a study conducted by Burrell et al. [ 160 ], woodchip derived biomass resulted in greater reductions in bulk density in coarse-textured Planosol compared to other soils. It also significantly improved soil aggregate stability in the Planosol as compared to Cambisol and no noticeable impact in Chernozem. They also reported that straw derived biochar was more effective in enhancing soil structure, particularly in the Planosol, where it increased aggregate stability by upto 98% and plant available water by 38%. Addition of biochar to the soil also improves the overall organic C content. Organic matter is known to influence cation exchange capacity (CEC) by providing binding sites for cations. This, in turn, improves the availability of essential minerals such as potassium (K), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), manganese (Mn), and copper (Cu). Over a long time (more than 5 years), biochar additions have been shown to enhance SOM by 46%, which is crucial for the mineralization process of nutrients [ 170 , 171 , 172 ]. In another study by Mohan et al. [ 179 ], corn stover and rice husks were converted to slow pyrolysis biochars (CSBC and RHBC), and these biochars were then used in soil incubation studies. The pH of water suspensions containing CSBC and RHBC was higher (more basic) compared to a water suspension of control soil. The elevated pH values in biochar suspensions were attributed to the presence of basic oxides, hydroxides, and possibly carbonates formed from ions like Na + , K + , Ca 2+ , and Mg 2+ during the pyrolysis process that produces biochar. Increase in electrical conductivity (EC) values as well as soil pH has also been observed with the addition of biochar to soil. The rise in soil pH could be linked to an increase in the soil's cation exchange capacity which in turn is attributed to the high surface areas and porosity of biochars [ 180 ]. These changes can have implications for soil fertility, nutrient availability, and overall soil health. The application of biochar improved the availability of K, Na, Ca, and Mg, ammonium bicarbonate-diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (AB-DTPA) extractable Fe, and Mn in calcareous loamy sand soils, while reducing the AB-DTPA extractable Zn [ 181 ]. 3.2 Effect of biochar to enhance C sequestration in carbon neutralization technology Among the global carbon cycle, soil C pool is the largest terrestrial carbon pool containing 1500–2400 Gt (Giga tonnes) C, which is 2.5–3.5 times greater than that of atmospheric CO 2  (860 Gt C) and vegetation (450–650 Gt C) [ 182 ]. Soil organic matter is an important factor among terrestrial soil C pool that influences the soil fertility and health. Since a slight change in soil C storage can profoundly impact atmospheric CO 2 concentration, soil C sequestration has emerged as a crucial aspect of mitigating GHG emissions and maintaining ecological balance [ 170 , 171 , 172 , 183 ]. With the growing emphasis on sustainable agriculture and ecological environment protection, it has become exceedingly urgent to search for efficient soil C sequestration strategies. Application of biochar has been demonstrated to be a successful strategy for boosting soil C sequestration and altering the agricultural soil C cycle [ 184 , 185 , 186 ]. The dissolved solids released from biochar not only shorten the duration of C sequestration but also diminish its efficacy on improving soil C fixation. Highly aromatic and recalcitrant structure of biochar makes it resistance to microbial degradation, helping in long term carbon storage [ 187 ]. Also, biochar can physically protect organic matter by trapping it in its porous matrix and adsorbing dissolved organic carbon on its surface due to its high adsorption ability. Biochar also enhances soil aggregation, which further stabilizes organic carbon by limiting microbial access and enzymatic breakdown [ 117 ]. El-Naggar et al. [ 188 ] recorded increase in SOM content by 42–72% in sandy and 32–48% in loam soil by adding biochar produced from rice straw, umbrella tree, silver grass and crop residues. Adding biochar to soils also increases the amount of SOC [ 189 ]. It increases SOC either by microbial decomposition or by preserving exiting natural SOC [ 190 ]. The persistent OM decomposers in biochar amended soils mineralized the recalcitrant components and increased the soil derived CO 2 efflux. It has been reported that biochar produced from agricultural residues can trap approximately 1.2 t C ha −1 annually [ 191 ], whereas biochar derived from manure captures nearly 0.6 t C ha −1  yr −1 , which might be due to the differences in C contents [ 192 ]. Majumder et al. [ 193 ] found that biochar sequester 0.7 t C ha −1 annually on average basis, with observed variations ranging from 0.1 to 2 t C ha −1  yr −1 depending on factors such as feedstock type and pyrolysis conditions. In another study, faster mineralization of SOC was reported with amendment of soil with Biochar500 or Biochar600 (biochars pyrolyzed at 500 °C and 600 °C, respectively) [ 38 , 39 ] that offsett C sequestration effects. A shift in microbial community structure was also induced by addition of BC in soils, which caused the dominance of Gemmatimonadetes, Bacteroidia, Alpha proteobacteria and Gamma proteobacteria. Biochar600 increased additional soil derived CO 2 carbon loss over 28 days incubation (93 mg C kg −1 soil). In another experiment, the addition of BC increased the relative abundance of Actinobacteria in the rhizosphere, enhanced availability of nutrients, and increased the root biomass [ 65 ]. The expression of β-1,4-glucosidase (BG) and β-N-acetylglucosaminidase (NAG) hydrolases was enhanced by 26% and 47%, respectively by expanding the extent of rhizosphere hotspots. In contrast, increased nutrient cycling was obtained in maize rhizosphere by triggering microbial growth and biomass due to addition of straw. The straw treatment enriched especially fast-growth r-strategists (Firmicutes), and a large number of enzymes including BG and NAG hydrolases were synthesized. Meng et al. [ 184 , 185 ] performed a meta-analysis of 1150 comparisons from 86 peer-reviewed publications to assess the effects of four types of biochar application during soil C cycle on carbon components in a farmland. The application of chaff biochar significantly inhibited (10.0%) soil respiration, while the application of manure biochar (47.0%), straw biochar (11.2%) and wood biochar (8.7%) showed a strong promotion effect on CO 2 emission. In addition, soil organic C, microbial biomass C and dissolved organic C all had positive responses to the application of the four biochar types, the degree and increase in their response varied greatly due to the differences in biomass raw materials. Moreover, by increasing the biochar rates applied to coarse-textured soils with low average annual rainfall and an average temperature under controlled circumstances, the relative increase in SOC was encouraged. Meanwhile, applying low temperature pyrolytic biochar (≤ 400 °C) at a lower rate (< 25 t/ha) in the long-term experiment (> 3 years) is more beneficial to soil C sequestration and emission reduction. Hence, climatic conditions, agricultural management practices, and initial soil properties jointly constrained and influenced the ability of biochar to alter the soil C cycle. Biochar prepared from cellulase-treated lignocellulose (BC-SR) was utilized as a soil amendment to improve soil C fixation and enhance C sequestration in a carbon neutralization technology [ 182 ]. BC-SR promoted a net increase of 4.39 mg C g −1 in soil (equivalent to fixing 16.10 mg CO 2 g −1 ), which was 28% higher than ordinary biochar after one year. The BC-SR enhanced microbial autotrophic metabolism, promoted the formation of soil macroaggregates to protect easily degradable organic carbon and increased the proportion of refractory organic matter. Thus, BC-SR exerted a stronger effect on autotrophic metabolism as compared with ordinary biochar and the newly generated OM persisted in the soil for a longer time. In another study, low-release biochar was found more stable compared to conventional biochar due to its resistance to soil microbial degradation and the autotrophic microbial agents strengthened this property. Autotrophic microbial agents and low-release biochar (AM&BC-SR) were used as a combined soil amendment to boost soil C sequestration [ 194 ]. After one year, AM&BC-SR's soil organic carbon was 33% higher than the initial and 78% above blank, achieving a net carbon fixation of 4.1 g kg −1 . Moreover, their synergistic effect was manifested in the soil physical and chemical properties and soil C metabolism. AM&BC-SR significantly promoted the most widely distributed microbial carbon fixation pathway (Calvin–Benson cycle), with the abundance of key enzyme genes being 35∼120% higher than blank. In soil heterotrophic metabolism, AM&BC-SR also promoted the glycolysis pathway. The synergistic functional system among biochar, autotrophic microbial agents, and soil indigenous heterotrophic microorganisms enabled AM&BC-SR to effectively increase soil organic C while keeping the rise in soil respiration at a low level. Thus, use of AM&BC-SR has emerged as novel carbon–neutral technology that can play an unprecedented role in soil improvement as a green fertilizer. 3.3 Influence of biochar on microbial community and biological processes The use of biochar in soil has multifaceted benefits for stimulating growth of microbial communities leading to an increase in their numbers and abundance in the soil [ 23 , 195 , 196 ]. The expression of plant growth promoting (PGP) activities by these microbial communities enhance soil nutrient content and soil fertility, mitigate the negative impacts of environmental stresses, and promote growth of crop plants [ 72 , 73 , 197 , 198 , 199 ]. The increased availability of nutrients also plays crucial role in enhancing the diversity and abundance of soil microbial communities [ 200 , 201 , 202 ]. Biochar has a high adsorption capacity due to its large specific surface area that allows it to immobilize the pollutants in soil and minimize their toxic effects on microorganisms. 3.3.1 Biochar as habitat for soil microorganisms Application of biochar improves the physicochemical and biological properties of the soil. The porous structure of biochar is highlighted as a crucial feature with significant effects on the soil biology and environment [ 198 , 199 ]. Pores in biochar serve as a habitat for microorganisms in the soil. Biochar's porous structure also plays a role in protecting soil microbes from predation [ 203 ]. This protection is particularly relevant because the pore size of biochar is typically larger than most soil microorgainsms. The size of biochar pores excludes large arthropods. The ability of biochar to accommodate soil microorganisms within its pores, coupled with the exclusion of larger predators, provides a microenvironment conducive for the colonization of microorganisms in the soil [ 63 , 64 , 204 ]. Several factors affect microbial colonization of biochar as shown in Fig.  3 . The rate of microbial colonization of biochar is linked to the degree of aging of the biochar; as aged biochar is generally more favourable for microbial growth due to reduced release of contaminants. Freshly applied biochar may release endogenous contaminants, such as cadmium, which can slow down the microbial colonization in the soil [ 205 ]. The co-interaction between different microorganisms can also play a role in determining the time and rate of colonization [ 206 ]. The application of biochar to soil has diverse effects on soil physical properties, such as density and aggregate stability, as well as on key soil processes, including water retention, GHG emissions (both N 2 O and methane), and the composition of nitrifying and denitrifying bacterial communities. These changes have direct and indirect consequences for soil microorganisms and can influence the overall health and functioning of the soil ecosystem. Biochar application affects the density of the soil and the stability of aggregates [ 187 , 207 ]. The reduction in soil bulk density may contribute to improved soil structure and its water holding capacity. This improvement in water retention can positively impact the availability of water for plants and soil microorganisms. The effect of biochar application can have implications for nitrogen cycling in the soil due to its influence on the composition and activity of soil nitrifying and denitrifying bacterial communities [ 12 ]. These changes will subsequently affect nutrient availability and losses in the soil and the rhizosphere. Zheng et al. [ 208 ] reported that the application of BC in paddy soils had specific effects on the total N content and the community structure of soil microorganisms. Biochar application resulted in an increase in the total N content in paddy soils. In general, bacterial communities were found to be less affected by biochar application, where as the communities of Ascomycota and Basidiomycota were more affected. The differential impact on bacterial and fungal communities suggests that biochar application may have a selective effect on different microbial groups. The impact of straw biochar was evaluated on soil microbiome in the wheat rhizosphere using metagenomic sequencing [ 56 ]. It was observed that straw return decreased the yields of wheat, while the straw biochar increased the wheat yields. The straw biochar return also resulted in greater rhizosphere effects from wheat, as represented by resource availability, including SOC, soil total N, available P, and available K. However, the expression of microbial metabolism genes involved in C, N, P, and K cycling, were decreased by straw biochar returning. These results revealed that straw biochar enhanced soil resource availability, but suppressed microbial metabolism genes in the wheat rhizosphere. In another experiment, cucumber plants were treated with sweet pepper straw biochar (SPSB) at 5% (w/w) concentration and high-throughput sequencing of soil microbial community structure was performed [ 63 , 64 ]. Soil microbial community structure was significantly altered with this biochar concentration and BC amendment enhanced bacterial and fungal diversity. The beneficial bacterial groups especially Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacillus were increased, and a decrease in Ascomycota and  Aspergillus  along with shifts in  Penicillium  abundance was observed. The enrichment in bacterial metabolic pathways as well as upregulation of fungal expression and replication genes was reported using functional genomic analysis. In another recent study, the amendment of biochar along with halotolerant  Halomonas salifodinae was examined on Medicago sativa grass and it significantly increased soil pH, enzyme activities, SOC, and readily oxidizable carbon [ 66 , 67 , 68 ]. Moreover, silicon-modified biochar significantly increased the relative abundances of beneficial taxa such as  Bacillus  and  Xanthomonadaceae  by 482.7% and 52.7%, contributing to enhanced microbial diversity and network stability. In similar study, the effect of biochar amendment on microbial metabolic quotient ( q CO 2 ) was analyzed in rice paddy field and incorporation of biochar induced a lower microbial q CO 2 in the bulk soil, whereas little effect on  q CO 2 was observed in the rhizosphere compared with the non-amended control [ 209 ]. The sizes of soil labile C and N pools significantly declined in the bulk soil, whereas increased in the rhizosphere under biochar. Biochar amendment at 40 t ha −1  significantly changed bacterial community composition and increased their co-occurrence network complexity. In addition, the activities of β-glucosidase, phenol oxidase and peroxidase was enhanced after biochar amendment in both bulk and rhizosphere soils. Structural equation modeling suggested that biochar decreased  q CO 2 in the bulk soil mainly by increasing soil pH, C/N ratio, microbial substrate utilization and enzyme activities. This study suggested that soil organic carbon lability, carbon-degrading enzyme activities and changes in bacterial community composition were key drivers of  q CO 2 in the bulk soil. 3.3.2 Effect of biochar on microbial signaling molecules Various kinds of signaling molecules are secreted by plants and microbes into the rhizosphere, which affect the communication and interactions of microorganisms with plants during beneficial or harmful interactions [ 210 ]. These signaling molecules control the microbial growth and coordinate the behaviour and activities of microorganisms in the rhizosphere. Various signals molecules include N-acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs), strigolactones, flavonoids, diffusible signal factor (DSF), VOCs and phytohormones [ 211 , 212 ]. These molecules may also function as inter-kingdom signals that elicit various effects on plant developmental processes. The biochar application has been found to affect the communication of microbial signaling molecules. For instance, the degree of hydrolysis of signaling molecule AHL is influenced by changes in soil pH, which is commonly used by Gram-negative bacteria for quorum sensing for cell-to-cell communication, allows bacteria to coordinate their behaviour based on population density. As pH increases due to application of biochar, the hydrolysis of AHL also increases, and it results in a reduction in intercellular signaling by bacteria. Unlike AHL, farnesol which is another signaling molecule, is not sensitive to changes in pH, therefore, the presence of biochar does not have a significant effect on inter- and intra-species signalling by fungi using farnesol [ 206 , 213 ]. Biochar also possess the ability to adsorb AHL and this adsorption is influenced by the pyrolysis temperature during biochar production. Specifically, biochar produced at higher temperatures through cracking processes has a greater capacity to adsorb AHL molecules. The interaction between biochar and AHL can have implications for gene expression and inter/intraspecific communication among soil microorganisms [ 214 ]. This suggests that the presence of biochar in the soil can potentially interfere with the signaling mechanisms of Gram-negative bacteria, impacting their ability to communicate and regulate behaviour. Recently, Li et al. [ 215 ] found that biochar amendment significantly enhanced (2.7-fold) the secretion of AHLs, which subsequently promoted the synthesis of C-type cytochromes and humic acid-like substances, improving the electron exchange capability of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), and thereby promoted direct interspecies electron transfer (DIET). Additionally, increase in the proportion of polysaccharides in EPS due to biochar-induced AHLs enriched potential DIET partners, with the relative abundance of Geobacter and Methanosaeta increasing from 2.88% and 54.69% to 4.91% and 55.60%, respectively. Thus, enrichment of electroactive microorganisms by biochar-induced AHLs and enhanced DIET improved EPS electron transfer capacity and thereby, enhanced methane production. It was reported that addition of biochar accelerated the degradation of volatile fatty acids, and increased the maximum methanation rate by 24.97 ± 0.23% in comparison to the control system. 4 Role of biochar in mitigation of abiotic and biotic stresses Agriculture is the most vulnerable sector, which is often exposed to plethora of climate changes. Global warming, changes in precipitation patterns, recent abrupt changes in climatic conditions and other catastrophes have increased incidences of abiotic and biotic stresses that manage the operations of the agroecosystem, consequently influencing the worldwide food security [ 54 , 216 , 217 ]. Harsh environments such as drought, salinity, water logging, extreme temperatures (heat, cold and frost), intense light, changes in pH, flooding and heavy metals have been accounted for as major cause for stagnation of productivity in agriculture and horticulture crops [ 218 , 219 , 220 , 221 ] and cause up to 51–82% losses annually in agricultural productivity worldwide. These abiotic stresses adversely affect the plants at different molecular, physiological, biochemical as well as cellular levels, and impair crop growth, development, survival, yields and food production [ 6 , 222 , 223 ]. On the other hand, biotic stress is caused by biological factors such as diseases triggered by microorganisms (bacteria, molds and viruses), insects, nematodes and weeds [ 224 , 225 ], which cause huge economic losses in agriculture and forestry by reducing yield and quality. According to a global survey of the major food crops, pests, pathogens and weeds cause average yield losses ranging from 17.2% in potato to 30.0% in rice [ 226 ]. Climate changes aggravate the effect of these stresses [ 54 , 227 ]. Use of naturally-occurring beneficial microbes has emerged as novel cost-effective and eco-friendly strategy to manage environmental stresses in plants to boost sustainable agricultural development [ 218 , 228 , 229 , 230 , 231 ]. Recently, biochar is also gaining attention as a potentially valuable input for agriculture for mitigating the impact of abiotic and biotic stresses and to improve fertility of soil [ 44 , 232 ]. Biochar have several benefits in improvement of soil health, increasing crop yield, decreasing GHG emissions and mitigation of climate change. It also promotes beneficial microbial community and alleviates impact of drought, salinity and heat stress on the crops [ 6 , 233 , 234 ]. 4.1 Biochar as a potential amendment to mitigate drought and salinity stress One major abiotic stressor that causes a significant decrease in agricultural output is drought stress [ 6 , 235 ]. Many functions are disrupted by drought stress, ranging from morphological to physiological and anatomical level. Drought stress reduces the production of chlorophyll and causes senescence, which significantly reduces photosynthesis and agricultural yield [ 236 , 237 ]. According to Vijayaraghavareddy et al. [ 238 ], drought stress leads to generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which damage DNA, proteins, lipids, and enzymatic processes [ 239 , 240 ]. Crop productivity declines as a result of detrimental effects caused by drought stress on agronomic attributes and physiological processes [ 241 ]. Developing strategies to mitigate the effects of drought stress by biochar amendment is recently gaining attention for ensuring sustainable and resilient agricultural systems that can positively impact soil and plant properties, ultimately helping in mitigating the detrimental effects of drought stress on crops [ 6 , 242 ]. Thus, biochar is usually referred to as the "black gold" of agriculture, indicating its high value and significance in the context of improving agricultural production. Application of biochar to soil is associated with several positive effects, including an increase in SOC, soil moisture contents, water and nutrient uptake, cation exchange capacity (CEC), and aggregate stability. These improvements contribute in enhancing drought tolerance in plants [ 243 ]. In addition to having a negative impact on plasma membrane, drought stress dehydrates the cytoplasm, which leads to increased electrolyte leakage (EL) and lipid peroxidation [ 244 ]. In a study conducted by Hafez et al. [ 245 ], the addition of biochar and chitosan contributed to enhanced drought stress tolerance in barley plants. This enhancement is attributed to a decrease in electrolyte leakage and lipid peroxidation. The improvements in membrane stability, relative water content (RWC), and water pressure are suggested as mechanisms for this increased tolerance. It has been observed that in Medicago ciliaris plants grown under drought stress and treated with biochar, there is a significant reduction in the concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA), a marker indicating lipid peroxidation under drought conditions [ 221 ]. Yildirim et al. [ 246 ] found that biochar decreases MDA accumulation in Brassica oleracea by increasing the activity of antioxidant enzymes. This implies that biochar may contribute to reducing oxidative damage by enhancing the plant's antioxidant defense mechanisms. Osmolytes also play an indispensable role in combating drought stress. It has been observed that drought stress can disturb the hormonal balance and osmolyte accumulation in plants. Proline, produced under stress conditions, is having a dual role as a reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger and for osmotic adjustment. This reduction is attributed to less ROS production and reduced oxidative and osmotic stresses in biochar-amended plants. In the case of barley plants treated with biochar and chitosan, there is a marked reduction in soluble sugars, sucrose, and starch contents under stressed and controlled conditions. This suggests an influence on carbohydrate metabolism in response to these amendments [ 245 ]. According to Gullap et al. [ 247 ], biochar application and irrigation levels significantly affected the contents of abscisic acid (ABA), indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and gibberellic acid (GA) in soybean plants under drought stress. Biochar application was observed to increase IAA and GA, while decreasing ABA contents and maintain hormone balance. Thus, biochar helps in maintaining hormones and osmolyte accumulation in plants [ 221 ]. In a stride to evaluate the individual and combined impact of biochar and plant growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB), olive trees were treated with Bacillus siamensis  and biochar from olive tree pruning for enhancing resilience to water stress [ 248 ]. Increased aerial biomass was obtained in olive trees compared to those treated separately or untreated under both water-stressed and optimal conditions treated with the biochar-bacteria combination. Various stress indicators, including ABA and oxidative damage markers (H 2 O 2  and MDA), along with downregulation of dehydrin (DHN) genes (which counteract lipid peroxidation) were reduced. Additionally, downregulation of aquaporin (AQP) genes suggested improved water status by reducing water transport across cell walls, thus aiding cell hydration. Soil salinity is another critical constraint to crop productivity and global food security [ 220 , 249 , 250 ]. The application of biochar is associated with favorable changes in soil and plant functioning to enhance salinity stress tolerance [ 251 , 252 , 253 ]. Various mechanisms are involved by which biochar improves salinity tolerance [ 221 ] (Fig.  4 ). Salinity stress causes membrane damage and this is associated with an increase in MDA accumulation [ 254 ]. The concentration and composition of fatty acids and lipids has a significant influence on membrane functioning, stability and fluidity. Unsaturated fatty acids are specifically highlighted for their critical role in membrane protein activity and membrane protection [ 255 ]. The application of biochar is reported to increase the concentration of unsaturated fatty acids, which is suggested to improve membrane stability under salinity stress [ 256 ]. The application of biochar also improves antioxidant activities, including those of enzymes such as ascorbate peroxidase (APX), catalase (CAT), peroxidase (POD), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione reductase (GR). These antioxidant activities are reported to protect the membranes from the damaging effects of salinity stress [ 257 ]. Lashari et al. [ 258 ] reported that the application of manure and biochar has a positive impact on membrane stability by reducing MDA concentration. A reduction in MDA concentration implies lower levels of lipid peroxidation, indicating a positive impact on the integrity and stability of cellular membranes. Fig. 4 Full size image Mechanisms involved in enhancing salinity tolerance using biochar. Application of biochar to soil is associated with several positive effects that improves salinity tolerance such as improved photosynthesis in plants, detoxification of reactive oxygen species, increase in soil moisture contents, water and nutrient accumulation, membrane stability, and improved expression of stress responsive genes Biochar application also contributes to an improvement in the leaf water status of plants by increasing potassium concentration in plant tissues and improving leaf relative water content (RWC). Osmoprotectants are substances that help protect cells from the adverse effects of osmotic stress, such as water loss or excess salinity [ 259 ]. Relative water content is a measure of the water content in plant tissues relative to their maximum water-holding capacity. An increase in RWC indicates improved water retention and hydration in plant leaves. The improvement in leaf RWC after biochar application leads to increase in water use efficiency (WUE) by plants [ 260 ]. The application of biochar is reported to promote the uptake of nutrients by plants. This improvement is suggested to contribute to salinity stress tolerance by modifying cellular signaling pathways [ 261 ]. In addition, the improvement in Ca 2+ content is specifically linked to enhanced salinity stress tolerance. According to Kim et al. [ 257 ], biochar application is reported to increase tissue P contents. This increase is found to be dose-dependent, suggesting that higher doses of biochar result in higher P concentrations in plant tissues. Usman et al. [ 262 ] found that biochar substantially increased the concentrations of several elements such as P, K, iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), Zn, and copper (Cu) in tomato plants growing under salinity stress. The dose-dependent response highlighted by Kim et al. [ 257 ] underscores the importance of considering the application rate of biochar for optimizing nutrient benefits. In another experiment, Jin et al. [ 253 ] analyzed the long-term effects of biochar application in saline-alkali paddy soils and its effects were evaluated on soil physicochemical properties, nutrient availability, soil enzyme activities and rice yield. The application of BC continuously reduced the soil Na +  concentration, Na + /K +  ratio, Na + /Ca 2+  ratio, exchangeable sodium percentage (ESP), and sodium adsorption ratio. Over the 6-year study, BC amendment also enhanced the concentrations of K + , Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , and CEC, which indicated the long-term positive impact of biochar application saline-alkali paddy soils. Interestingly, application of BC at higher doses i.e., 3.0% (T3.0) and 4.5% (T4.5) significantly improved nutrient availability and soil enzyme activities. In similar studies, the combined treatment of BC (prepared from moss) and halotolerant  Halomonas salifodinae  remarkably assisted the root binding and biofilm formation of  H. salifodinae  on the Medicago sativa grass roots [ 66 , 67 , 68 ]. Moreover, the activity of soil enzymes, including peroxidase, alkaline phosphatase and urease also increased after the combined treatment. Meanwhile, the levels of various cations e.g., Na + , Cu 2+ , Fe 2+ , Mg 2+ , Mn 2+ , etc. in the rhizosphere soil were reduced after the combined treatment, suggesting an improvement in the saline–alkali soil quality. Recently, Zubairu et al. [ 263 ] reviewed the pivotal role of biochar in sustainable remediation of soil salinity. Results showed that biochar amendment remediates soil salinity due to its inherent characteristics like high CEC and possession of anion exchange capacity (AEC) that deprives both cations and anions that form salt in the soil. Application of biochar positively favours the growth of crops under salt stress by boosting K +  availability, high salt sorption capacity, increased plant water intake, accelerated transpiration, lowered soil EC, increased soil accessible nutrients, increased soil moisture saving, and optimizes the water-salt balance of the soil during saline irrigation, which all favoured crop performance. In another experiment, Jing et al. [ 264 ] reported that the simultaneous addition of biochar and  Bacillus fexus  under salt-stress conditions improved the soil physicochemical properties and increased the humus components content and stability, which improved the soil quality of saline–alkali land and enhanced the productivity of fruit mulberry. The salt stress +  B. fexus  + biochar (SS + P + B) treatment significantly increased soil total porosity, non-capillary porosity, pH value, electrical conductivity, the water stable macro-aggregates, organic matter, humic acid (HA) and humin (HM) contents, the HA/fulvic acid (FA) and HA/HE (humus-extractable) ratios, and the activities of catalase and urease. 4.2 Role of biochar in mitigating biotic stresses Biochar has the potential to suppress the plant diseases caused by soil pathogens [ 265 , 266 ]. Biochar amendment has shown pathogen-suppressive effects against a variety of plant pathogens, including bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, and nematodes, and has been associated with improved plant growth [ 66 , 67 , 68 , 267 , 268 ]. Biochar have the ability to reduce plant pathogenicity by enhancing resistance, increasing nutritional content and retention in the soil, improving soil structure and removing toxic compounds from contaminated soils through detoxification and adsorption. For instance, biochar application resulted in increased resistance to specific plant pathogens such as Leveillula taurica and Botrytis cinerea in tomatoes and pepper [ 269 ]. Leveillula taurica is a fungus that causes powdery mildew in plants and Botrytis cinerea is a fungus that causes gray mold in various crops. The degree/level of plant stress resistance is related to the amount of biochar applied. Higher application rates of biochar resulted in a greater increase in plant stress resistance compared to lower application rates. Biochar amendment can also enhance a plant's resistance to herbivores by affecting the levels of a plant hormone jasmonic acid that plays a key role in defense mechanisms against herbivores. By influencing JA levels, biochar may contribute in making plants less attractive or more resistant to herbivorous pests. The effectiveness of biochar depends on various factors, including the type of biochar used, soil conditions, and specific plant species. Gao et al. [ 266 ] reported that biochar from wheat straw improved the health of tomato plants infected with Ralstonia solanacearum , and minimized the severity of bacterial wilt. Also it increased the levels of total C, N, K, P, C:N ratio, pH, and electrical conductivity. Biochar produced from maize has been found to improve the crop response to the pathogens. In a study, maize stalk biochar reduced the effect of Phytophthora blight (caused by Phytophthora capsica ) on pepper up to 50% by increasing diversity and abundance of biocontrol fungi such as Aspergillus and Trichoderma [ 270 ]. Arshad et al. [ 271 ] studied the effect of rice husk biochar on tomato plant, which increased the biomass of plant as well as trigger defence related genes (such as PR-1b and JERF3) to reduce the infection of nematode Meloidogyne incognita . According to Chen et al. [ 272 ], biochar application was found to reduce the reproductive potential of the English grain aphid Sitobion avenae in wheat by the activation of defense-related genes in wheat. Bamboo charcoal is recognized as a regenerative biochar due to its cost-effectiveness and environmental friendliness [ 273 ]. The by-products of bamboo charcoal have been reported to show activities against specific insect pests, including Tetrenchus cinnabarinus , Emposasca flavescens , and Aphis medicagini [ 274 ]. This suggests that the use of bamboo charcoal may have a dual benefit by improving plant growth and simultaneously providing a level of protection against certain insect pests. Application of bamboo charcoal is said to induce the biosynthesis of flavonoids, terpenoids, and phenolic acids in plants, which are known for their antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, and they can play a crucial role in the plant's defense against herbivores and pests. Thus, use of bamboo charcoal promotes healthier plant growth, and the plant becomes more robust and resilient to external stress pressures. For instance, the induced production of flavonoids, terpenoids, and phenolic acids enhanced the tomato plant's tolerance against destructive pest South American Tomato Pinworm Tuta absoluta , commonly known as the tomato leaf miner, which affects tomato plants and other solanaceous crops [ 275 ]. These compounds can act as natural defenses, deterring or inhibiting the survival and development of the pest. Thus, application of bamboo charcoal appears to trigger a cascade of biochemical responses in plants, leading to the synthesis of compounds that benefit plant growth and enhance tolerance against pests like T. absoluta . This aligns with the broader concept of using biochar and natural plant defense mechanisms for sustainable and environmentally friendly pest management in agriculture. The combined treatment of biochar with different oil cakes or antagonistic microorganisms decreased the population of pathogens and root-knot nematodes. For instance, amendment with BC and biochar combined with synthetic community (SynCom) consisting of PGPB suppressed soil-borne pathogens and alleviated replant disease in Radix pseudostellariae by modifying rhizosphere soil protistan and plant-associated microbial communities [ 276 ]. Biochar alone and its combined treatment with Bacillus SynCom improved the physiological traits and main agronomic components of Radix pseudostellariae under field experiments. The relative abundance of pathogenic Ralstonia was significantly decreased with the combined treatment, and it stimulated the Bacillus abundance in the root and Paenibacillus in the leaf, and the combined treatment also increased the abundance of the predatory protists Cercomonas and Paracercomonas in the soil. In similar studies, effect of BC alone and in combination with different oil cakes (viz. castor, coconut, mustard, linseed, and sesame) was evaluated on tomato ( Solanum lycopersicum L.) plants cv. Pusa–Ruby [ 267 ]. Biochar in combination with various oil cakes developed resistance to the root-knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita in tomato plants. Furthermore, the eggmass/root, the number of galls and nematode population were decreased after BC amendment with oil cakes as compared to the untreated control plants. Higher effect in declining the nematode population was reported with amendment of BC and castor oil cake, followed by treatments with BC + mustard cake, BC + sesame cake, BC + linseed cake, and BC + coconut cake. Minimal effect in declining the nematode population was observed when tomato plants were treated with biochar alone. Silicon (Si)-modified biochar was reported to significantly reduce the abundance of  Ralstonia solanacearum  in soil by 41.3%, and in tomato roots, stems, and leaves by 67.1%, 72.6%, and 65.1%, respectively [ 66 , 67 , 68 ]. The wilt disease index was reduced by 73.4%, indicating effective suppression of soil-borne pathogens. Moreover, Si-modified biochar significantly increased the relative abundances of beneficial taxa such as  Bacillus  and  Xanthomonadaceae  by 482.7% and 52.7%, contributing to enhanced microbial diversity and network stability. Thus, Si-modified biochar mitigated bacterial wilt by enriching beneficial microbes, increasing soil enzyme activity, and promoting C sequestration, collectively reinforcing rhizosphere soil health. In another study, Kumari et al. [ 277 ] characterized four  Trichoderma  isolates ( T. harzianum , T. asperellum , T. virens , and  T. lixii ) with antipathogenic properties and their GC–MS analysis revealed 37 VOCs. The combined application of  Trichoderma  and biochar (T9) significantly enhanced root length (9.23 cm), plant height (26.03 cm), and root mass (43.33 g) in chickpea plants. Moreover, treatments (T9) and (T10) reduced the disease incidence in chickpeas, decreasing Fusarium wilt by 27% and collar rot by 33%, respectively. Scanning electron microscopy analysis of  T. harzianum  revealed mycoparasitic structures, including hyphal coils, penetration holes, and appressoria, indicating effective pathogen interaction. In similar experiment, the distinct regulatory mechanisms of biochar (BC) on Bacillus subtilis and Rhizoctonia solani were explored to understand the growth inhibition of pathogens [ 265 ]. BC, consisting of micro-BC and nano-BC, caused oxidative stress due to production of ROS. B. subtilis secreted EPS, which aggregated nano-BC, enhanced cell adhesion, and reduced intracellular ROS (from 2.0 to 1.5-fold), promoting growth later with BC’s nutrient support. Conversely, R. solani can not block nano-BC entry, activating mitophagy and suppressing genes like ATP1,2 involved in oxidative phosphorylation and tricarboxylic acid cycle. This results in ATP deficiency, collapses antioxidant system, raises ROS (from 3.9 to 4.5-fold), decreases cell survival, and leads to cell death. These findings highlight BC’s selective microbial regulation and its potential for safe agricultural and environmental use. 5 Role of biochar in soil remediation and mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions As environmental problems continue to grow due to human activities [ 278 , 279 ], sustainable and creative ways are needed to tackle issues like soil pollution and GHG emissions. One emerging and promising solution for these environmental issues is use of biochar [ 280 , 281 ]. The carbon-rich porous structure of biochar enhances its ability to retain water, nutrients, particulate matter, capture potentially toxic elements, contribute in remediating soil pollutants and mitigating the release of GHG gases, and also support microbial activity in soils [ 282 , 283 ]. Biochar's physical and chemical properties make it an ideal candidate for a wide range of environmental applications, including soil remediation and carbon sequestration. 5.1 Soil remediation with biochar Recently, development of novel materials and innovative technologies has gained more attention to improve the quality of soil to remediate soil contaminats. Heavy metals (arsenic, cobalt, chromium, copper, zinc, mercury, lead and nickel) [ 284 ], organic compounds, and other hazardous pollutants are being added in soil due to ineffective waste disposal methods and injudicious use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides (Fig.  5 ) leading to decrease in soil fertility, reduced crop yield and disturbance in natural microflora distribution. These pollutants may have poisonous, mutagenic, or carcinogenic, characteristics and therefore, may lead to mutations in the genome of soil-inhabiting microbes, plants and animals that absorb them [ 285 , 286 ]. Current soil remediation techniques encompass physical, chemical, and biological treatments. Excavating waste material, burning them or leaching are examples of physical remediation, however, these methods are costly and may result in secondary problems. Chemical treatments employ reduction, immobilization, and modification; yet, they have the potential to pollute the soil. Compared to physical or chemical treatments, bioremediation approach employing microorganisms and plants has least adverse consequences [ 287 , 288 ]. Therefore, more economical and less time-consuming remediation measures are needed to lessen adverse side effects of soil contaminats and biochar can be quite helpful in these events [ 285 ]. Fig. 5 Full size image Different problems occurring in soil due to various anthropogenic activities. Excessive and injudicious use of chemical fertilizers causes environmental pollution problems. However, the reduction in use of chemical fertilizers may often reduce actual agricultural production. Anthropogenic activities cause different problems including heavy metals contamination, nutrient depletion and addition of organic pollutants. On the other hand, amendment of biochar in the soil improves soil structure and serves as a supportive habitat for colonization of beneficial microbial communities that enhance nutrient availability and nutrient use efficiency, resulting in reduced fertilizer dependency of crop plants Biochar amendment has proved an effective way to improve soil properties and decrease the harmful effects of soil acidification [ 127 , 128 ]. It is commonly recognized that adding biochar to soil may bind soil particles and plant roots, increasing both phytoremediation and bioremediation through their interactions [ 289 ]. Some studies have also suggested that biochar can adsorb most soil contaminants (organic as well as inorganic) from contaminated soil depending on specific biochar properties determined by the type of biomass used and the pyrolysis temperature applied [ 283 , 290 ]. Previously, the main focus of adding biochar to soil was not on soil contaminant remediation, but rather on how well it might improve the physical, chemical, and biological properties of the soil [ 291 ]. But with recent advances, many studies are focusing on the use of biochar for remediation of soil contaminants [ 283 , 292 , 293 ]. Due to extensive agriculture, soil is being contaminated by many HMs such as Cd, Cr, Hg, Pb, Zn, Cu, Ni, Se, As and Co, and persistent organic pollutants (POPs) [such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans] [ 284 ]. Recent studies suggest that BC application in such contaminated soils immobilizes HMs and POPs by different methods [ 294 ]. The in situ application of BC in contaminated soils bind pollutants, promote plant growth and stimulate ecological diversity [ 289 , 295 ]. It may also act as an important sink for dissolved pollutants in soil [ 296 , 297 ]. Besides this, BC can also manipulate soil acidity by increasing soil pH by mineralizing their innate ash alkalinity and sequestering the SOC for chelating the toxic Al 3+ . The negative charge due to the functional groups on the surface of biochar is responsible for attracting the positively charged pollutants [ 233 ]. For instance, applying 5% rice-straw biochar in cadmium-contaminated soil (50 mg kg −1 ) led to a 19.3% reduction in Cd levels, whereas bamboo biochar achieved an 8.6% reduction [ 298 ]. In a recent study, Xiong et al. [ 55 ] conducted a pot experiment using kitchen-waste biochar prepared at 300, 500, and 700 °C, which was applied either alone or in combination with  Escherichia coli . Low-temperature biochar (300 °C) exhibited limited Cd immobilization, reducing the acid-extractable Cd fraction by only 4.22% ± 0.20% compared with the control, but markedly enhanced soil fertility. In contrast, high-temperature biochar (700 °C) reduced the acid-extractable Cd fraction by 28.34% ± 0.50% and the total bioavailable Cd (F1 + F2) by 22.25% ± 0.04% relative to the water-treated control. The enhanced Cd stabilization of the 700 °C biochar was attributed to its well-developed pore structure and high alkalinity, which created favorable habitats for beneficial taxa such as  Bacillus ,  Rhodococcus , and  Mucor  while suppressing competitors. Although  E. coli  alone had negligible effects on Cd mobility, its co-application with low-temperature biochars even increased Cd bioavailability and plant uptake, whereas combination with the 700 °C biochar strongly immobilized Cd and minimized translocation risk. These findings suggested that the temperature-dependent physicochemical properties of biochar influence microbial communities, contributing to enhanced Cd immobilization in soil and provided a new theoretical basis for the selective application of biochar and efficient Cd immobilization in HM-contaminated soils. Biochar contributes to soil remediation by different mechanisms, which includes adsorption of pollutants, cation exchange capacity, pH buffering and particle size of biochar (Fig.  6 ). 
 
 1. 
 
 Adsorption of pollutants: One of the primary mechanisms through which biochar contributes to soil remediation is adsorption. Biochar's porous structure provides a large surface area for adsorption, effectively trapping and immobilizing a variety of pollutants such as HMs, pesticides, and organic contaminants. This prevents these pollutants from leaching into groundwater or being taken up by plants thereby reducing the risk of environmental contamination [ 299 , 300 ]. 
 
 
 
 2. 
 
 Cation exchange capacity: Biochar enhances the soil's cation exchange capacity, which refers to its ability to retain and exchange essential nutrients. This property is crucial for nutrient-poor soils, as it helps improve fertility and promotes healthier plant growth [ 301 ]. Additionally, the increased CEC can contribute to the immobilization of certain contaminants, further aiding in soil remediation [ 302 ]. 
 
 
 
 3. 
 
 pH buffering: Biochar also acts as a pH buffer, helping to maintain optimal pH levels in soils. This is particularly beneficial in acidic or alkaline soils where biochar can neutralize acidity or alkalinity, creating a more favorable environment for plant growth. Proper pH levels are essential for the availability of nutrients and the overall health of the soil ecosystem [ 303 ]. 
 
 
 
 4. 
 
 Particle size: Another important parameter of biochar for soil remediation is its size. The size range of BC utilized as soil amendment is typically between < 0.10 and 4 + mm; however, in a meta-analysis study of plant responses conducted by Thomas [ 304 ], it was suggested that biochar with particles sized at an intermediate range of ~ 0.5–1 mm was ideal for soil remediation. This relatively small particle size and high porosity provides biochar with great specific surface area and cation exchange capacity enabling it to retain water, nutrients and pollutants effectively [ 305 ]. Muhamad et al. [ 306 ] reported that the addition of hardwood biochar significantly increased the mineralization of 14 C-glucose at 5% biochar dosage and at finer particle sizes (2, 1, 0.5 and 0.1 mm). The pH of soil and carbon, and the microbial biomass also increased after biochar addition in unfertilized soil. Adding biochar to soil had no major change on the leaching of nitrate ions, but reduced the ammonium ion leaching. The efficacy of biochar application depends on soil type, nutrient availability, biochar application rate and particle size. 
 
 
 Fig. 6 Full size image Biochar amendment contributes to soil remediation by different mechanisms, which includes adsorption of pollutants, cation exchange capacity, pH buffering and particle size of biochar The combined application of rice husk BC (RH; at 0%, 2.5%, and 5% doses) and foliar application of salicylic acid (SA; 0, 0.5, and 1 mM concentration) on Chinese mustard caused greatest reductions of HMs such as Pb, Cu, Cd, and Zn concentrations i.e., 74.72, 69.19, 54.16, and 53.86%, respectively in the shoots as compared with untreated control plants [ 307 ]. Lu et al. [ 308 ] amended the six acidic paddy soils with seeded sunflower plate biochar (SSPBC), peanut straw biochar (PSBC) and corn straw biochar (CSBC). The incorporation of crop residue biochars led to the increases in soil pH and pHBC, but decreased soil available Cd content. The decreasing order of available Cd content was SSPBC > PSBC > CSBC and was consistent with the changes in soil pH induced by different kind of biochars. Also, there was a significant negative correlation between the change in available Cd content and soil pHBC during submerging/draining alternation. Consequently, the amount of Cd absorbed by rice in Cd-contaminated paddy soils was reduced, thereby reducing the potential risk of soil Cd to humans. In another study, Gong et al. [ 309 ] used mixed BC derived from rice husk and cow bone (MB), and it was loaded with cadmium (Cd)-tolerant PGPB to assess its performance on radish in a pot experiment. Results showed that MBM effectively reduced soil diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid extractable Cd content by 58.61% and Cd content in radish roots were decreased by 73.48%. MBM also significantly increased the abundance of phosphorous cycling functional genes, plant growth and soil health. In a recent experiment, Chang et al. [ 310 ] developed a biochar-loaded Ac material and clarified its chemical and microbial mechanisms for Cd immobilization and growth promotion of lettuce plants. It was reported that biochar-loaded nitrogen-fixing bacteria ( Azotobacter chroococcum ; BAc) enhanced Cd adsorption by forming stable complexes with bacterial secretions and activating biochar functional groups. Compared with biochar and Ac, Ac successfully colonized the lettuce rhizosphere, tagged with green fluorescent protein after BAc application. BAc reduced soil Cd bioavailability by 16.67–46.42% and Cd accumulation in root and shoot by 14.28–69.74%. This occurred by increasing soil pH and converting exchangeable Cd to carbonate-bound and Fe/Mn oxide-bound fractions. In another study, the synergistic effects of rice biochar (RBC) and Metabacillus indicus AMB4 (PGPR) on arsenic (As) bioavailability and rice physiological responses were evaluated under controlled and field conditions [ 73 ]. Combined RBC + PGPR treatment reduced soil As bioavailability by 85% and plant As accumulation by 78% as compared to control treatments, while significantly enhanced antioxidant enzyme activities (CAT: 4.2-fold, SOD: 3.7-fold, APX: 3.1-fold increase). Metagenomic studies revealed restructured microbial communities with increased Proteobacteria abundance and upregulated As detoxification genes ( ars C, ars B, aio A) coupled with enhanced nutrient cycling pathways ( nif H, pho D, sox A). Network analysis demonstrated functional integration between As-transformation and nutrient metabolism, with coordinated expression of 47 arsenic-responsive and 126 nutrient-cycling genes. In another study, Chauhan et al. [ 311 ] reviewed the pivotal role of microbial communities in facilitating the adsorption, transformation, detoxification of toxic heavy metal (THMs), through enzymatic activities and production of secondary metabolites, such as metalloproteins, siderophores and exopolysaccharides, and others. Additionally, synergistic application of biochar with beneficial microbes enhanced the THMs removal efficiency, minimized toxicity and promoted plant health,thus contributing to environmental protection and sustainable agriculture. Biochar amendments have also been found to influence pesticide degradation. Temperature significantly impacts adsorption efficiency of pesticides. Increasing pyrolysis temperature from 250 °C to 850 °C raised atrazine sorption on maize-stalk biochar from 21.9 to 35.8 mg g −1 due to a larger surface area and more functional groups [ 312 ]. The half-life of flubendiamide decreased from 165 days to 103 and 117 days with 5% and 10% biochar amendments, respectively, due to biochar’s adsorption limiting microbial degradation [ 313 ]. Additionally, biochar modified with nanoparticles exhibited a significantly higher sorption of pesticides capacity of 147 mg g −1 , compared to unmodified biochar, which had a capacity of 67.8 mg g −1 [ 314 ]. This enhancement can be attributed to the nanoparticles, which increased both the surface area and the functional groups present on the biochar. This confirms that biomixtures perform well in comparison to biochar alone with reference to pesticides sorption [ 315 ]. The influence of BC amendment was also investigated on microbial community succession in soil contaminated by PAH-phenanthrene and on mitigation of the toxicity effects on soil microbes [ 316 ]. The biochar-amended treatments (BC) and biochar immobilized with the phenanthrene-degrading bacteria (MBC) showed significantly lower phenanthrene removal rate (PRR) than the control treatments lacking biochar application or without inoculation (CK). Bacterial inoculation showed negligible effect on the soil bacterial community, whereas the BC amendment significantly changed the bacterial community structure and strengthened the bacterial co-occurrence network. Additionally, soil dehydrogenase activity (SDHA) and leaf CYP450 (cytochrome P450) activities were significantly higher in the BC, MB, and MBC treatments and lower than those in the CK treatment, respectively. Furthermore, BC amendment alleviated the toxicity or stress of PAH on soil microbes. In another study, the mechanisms of biochar-assisted di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) degradation were explored in organic contaminated farmland soils. The amendment of biochar (at 1.0% concentration) caused a significant increase in rhizosphere pH, OM and humus, and achieved a satisfactorily higher DEHP removal (maximally 77.53%) efficiency [ 317 ]. Biochar addition also remarkably changed rhizosphere bacterial communities by enriching some potential DEHP degraders including Nocardioides , Sphingomonas , Bradyrhizobium and Rhodanobacter . The abundance of genes encoding key enzymes (hydrolase, esterase and cytochrome P450) and DEHP-degrading genes ( pht 3, pht 4, pht 5, ben C- xyl Z and ben D- xyl L) were increased after BC amendment, leading to the change in DEHP degradation metabolism, primarily from benzoic acid pathway to protocatechuic acid pathway. He et al. [ 318 ] immobilized microorganisms on biochar to regulate the electron transfer capacity for anaerobic digestion (AD) of high-load organic wastewater. Compared with uncoupled groups, the CH 4 yield of pre-coupled groups increased by 26.4–36.9%, the lag phase shortened from 4.45 to 5.62 days to 0.85–1.06 days, and soluble chemical oxygen demand removal efficiency increased from 60.8 to 63.8% to 92.4–96.4%. Pre-coupling enhanced microbial activity and abundance, reduced the bacteria-archaea spatial distance, and promoted direct interspecies electron transfer. Synergistic microbes ( Syntrophobacter and Syntrophomonas ) were enriched, potentially establishing syntrophic relationships with methanogens to promote organic degradation. The developed biochar-microorganism hybrid demonstrated the potential to reduce hydraulic retention time and improve AD efficiency, offering valuable guidance for practical applications. Recently, Ghaedi et al. [ 319 ] reviewed the potential applications of metal organic frameworks (MOF) based composites in environmental engineering and pollution control. The adsorption capacity of composites is generally doubled compared to the standalone biochar, while MOFs maintain their crystallinity, even over multiple regeneration cycles, indicating the composites’ long-term applicability and sustainability. These findings highlight the potential of MOF-biochar composites for environmental applications and identify key areas for further research to enhance their sustainability in environmental protection and green energy. Peng et al. [ 320 ] developed an innovative solution for waste activated sludge (WAS) management in which WAS was converted to biochar and feedback catalyzed biosynthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA). Biochar significantly improved electron transfer during anaerobic digestion (by 61.36%) and boosted the proportion of PHA-producing bacteria by 12.33%, resulting in an 81.04% increase in PHA yield, comprising 66.14% of the dry sludge weight. Multi-omics analysis showed that biochar amplified the expression of key PHA synthesis genes ( pha A, 4.69-fold; pha B, 10.04-fold; and pha C, 12.02-fold). Thus, a sustainable approach was developed for WAS management, thereby advancing resource efficiency and providing ecological benefits. In a recent study, Zhang et al. [ 321 ] synthesized a novel rape straw-derived biochar-calcium alginate composite (M-CA-RBC) with immobilized Pseudomonas sp. H6 to simultaneously remove phosphate (PO 4 3− ) and ammonium (NH 4 + ) from distillery wastewater. The results showed that M-CA-RBC had good removal performance for PO 4 3− (17.81 mg g −1 ) and NH 4 + (25.78 mg g −1 ). After adsorption saturation, M-CA-RBC exhibited good stability, which could be used as a slow-release fertilizer to promote the growth of mung bean plants. 5.2 Mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions by application of biochar Agricultural production systems currently account for 10–14% of GHG emissions, but by 2030, it is predicted to increase upto 50% [ 322 , 323 ]. Therefore, implementing a vigorous climate change mitigation program is essential for achieving environmental sustainability. For this perspective, future agricultural production systems must be carbon neutral or negative in order to lessen the consequences of GHG emissions and global warming [ 75 , 324 , 325 ]. The "4 per 1000" campaign, which focuses on soils for food security and the environment to solve global GHG emission concerns, was started by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change [ 326 ]; https://www.4p1000.org . It aims to increase the yearly SOC sequestration of agricultural lands globally to 2–3 Gt C in the upper 100 cm soil in order to successfully offset 20–35% of the global C production. Therefore, high food-producing carbon negative technologies must be applied to address the numerous challenges [ 75 ]. Use of biochar has a potential as a cutting-edge technique to alleviate environmental issues and food hunger by increasing agricultural production, lowering GHG emissions, and minimizing soil and water pollution [ 75 , 327 ]. Biochar application in the soil results in substantial reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and various factors such as substrate used and preparation method used in biochar production, its interaction with other inputs and microbial communities, and crop management practices have been found to affect mitigation potential of GHG emissions using biochar in the soil (Fig.  7 ). Fig. 7 Full size image Factors affecting greenhouse gas emission mitigation potential of biochar. Various factors such as substrate used and preparation method used in biochar production, its interaction with other inputs and microbial communities, and crop management practices affect mitigation potential of GHG emissions in the soil Methane (CH 4 ) is an important greenhouse gas and has a global warming potential roughly 20 times higher than CO 2 , and studies have demonstrated that biochar can significantly mitigate CH 4 emissions from sources such as rice paddies, livestock manure, natural wetlands and landfills. Biochar supplementation to soil inhibits CH 4 production and lowering of CH 4 level in the atmosphere can contribute to mitigating of climate change. Biochar application initially does not directly inhibit methanogenic bacteria rather changes in the aeration properties of the soil may lead to a decrease in the activity and abundance of methanogenic bacteria. Conversely, there is an increase in the activity and abundance of methanophilic bacteria. Methanophilic bacteria are methane-consuming bacteria that utilize CH 4 as an energy source. These changes directly affect CH 4 emissions [ 328 , 329 ]. Another mechanism behind this reduction of CH 4 emission level is its adsorption onto biochar surfaces, followed by microbial oxidation [ 233 ]. A long-term field study reported that applying spruce-wood biochar at a rate of 10 t ha −1 led to a 43% decline in CH 4 emissions [ 330 ]. In rice paddy fields, biochar derived from rice straw has demonstrated its capacity to lower CH 4 emissions even under elevated CO 2 and temperature conditions [ 331 ]. This is achieved by inhibiting methanogen activity while fostering methanotrophic microbial populations [ 233 ]. Pyrolysis conditions also play a role in CH 4 emissions i.e., with biochar produced at 300 °C increased CH 4 emissions by 38%, while that produced at 700 °C resulted in an 18.2% reduction in CH 4 emissions [ 332 ]. These findings highlight the importance of pyrolysis conditions in determining biochar's impact on GHG emissions [ 333 ]. Applying biochar at a rate of 10% (w/w) can greatly reduce the CH 4 emissions. By enhancing soil aeration, decreasing denitrification, and boosting the capacity of the CH 4 sink, biochar helps in retardation of CH 4 release [ 334 ]. In soybean crops treated with biochar grown in the acidic soil of the Eastern Colombian Plains, there was an almost complete inhibition of CH 4 emission [ 335 ]. Findings in another study suggested that applying biochar in smaller annual doses over four years lowered CH 4 emissions by 41%, whereas a single high-dose application achieved a 38.3% reduction [ 336 ]. These results indicated that regular moderate applications of biochar enhance methanotroph activity more effectively than a single large dose, making them a more practical and sustainable strategy for improving soil health. According to Dawar et al. [ 337 ], biochar also affects the proportions of N-cycling in the soil by increasing the rates of ammonia (NH 3 ) adsorption, nitrification, and ammonia storage by increase in CEC of soil. This alters the efficacy of N input into the soil system. Nitrous oxide (N 2 O) is the third abundant greenhouse gas, and it can persist in the atmosphere for 110–180 years. Although N 2 O emission in 2020 accounted for about 7% of total greenhouse gases (GHG), its global warming potential is 265–310 times higher than CO 2 , resulting in a much stronger greenhouse effect than anticipated. Studies suggest that biochar can reduce N 2 O emissions by up to 50% in sandy-loam soils across varying moisture conditions [ 338 ]. Liao et al. [ 339 ] reported that treatment of oilseed rape ( Brassica napus L.) with biochar-based controlled release nitrogen fertilizers (BCRNFs) stimulated nitrification by increasing the copy number of the bacterial  amo A gene and reduced N 2 O emission by limiting the abundance of  nir S and  nir K as compared to urea treatment. A meta-analysis further reported an average 26% reduction in N 2 O emission in biochar amended soils, with the most pronounced effects observed in nitrogen-rich soils [ 340 ]. Manure application alone raised N 2 O emissions by 17.7%, but combined manure and biochar treatment reduced the emissions by 19.7% [ 340 ]. Factors such as the carbon to nitrogen (C:N) ratio, feedstock composition, and pyrolysis temperature, time of application and exposure limit all contributed to biochar’s effectiveness in mitigating N 2 O emissions [ 341 ]. Another study demonstrated that biochar enhances denitrification, reducing N 2 O accumulation by up to 98%, primarily due to its bulk structure rather than soluble compounds [ 170 , 171 , 172 ]. These findings suggested that biochar creates favourable physical and chemical conditions for denitrifying bacteria. However, its effectiveness in mitigating N 2 O emissions depends on the feedstock used and the pyrolysis temperature. In a recent comprehensive 3-year field study performed in a subtropical forest soil, Zhou et al. [ 342 ] revealed that application of straw biochar in the soil resulted in a substantial reduction of N 2 O emissions, ranging from 8.0 to 20.8% each year. Notably, the mitigation effect of biochar was particularly pronounced when N deposition was occurring, leading to an even greater reduction in N 2 O emissions by 14.2–22.0% annually. This mitigation effect is attributed to biochar’s capacity to lower the nitrification and denitrification rates of soil via reducing levels of ammonium N and water-soluble organic N. Additionally, biochar decreased the abundance of critical microbial genes, including AOA amo A,  nir K and  nir S, and reduced the activity of key enzymes such as nitrate and nitrite reductase. These findings highlighted the potential of straw biochar to effectively mitigate soil N 2 O emissions in subtropical forests experiencing N deposition, offering important insights for supporting ecosystem sustainability under global climate change. In another study, physical properties of biochar particularly particle size was demonstrated to significantly impact GHG emissions. For instance, smaller biochar particles (0.5–2 mm) are more effective in reducing carbon monoxide (CO) and N 2 O emissions than larger ones (5–10 mm) [ 343 ]. This is largely due to their increased surface area, which facilitates microbial interactions and accelerates decomposition. In other study, MnO 2 -modified biochar (MBC) was reported to improve microbial denitrification at low temperatures in cold climates [ 344 ]. The modification of biochar with MnO 2 considerably raised the specific surface area, pore volume, and electron transfer capacity of BC by 185%, 88% and 30%, respectively. The activities of key enzymes linked to glycolysis (HK, PFK, PK) and denitrification (Nar, Nir, Nos), alongside the electron transport system activity, as well as ATP and NADH levels, were significantly enhanced. The enrichment of Acidovorax and Tolumonas indicated that microbial manganese redox cycling played a critical role in promoting nitogen removal. Research also indicated that the reduction of NH 3 , N 2 O, and CH 4 emissions is significantly impacted by biochar produced from woody feedstocks and agricultural waste [ 345 ]. The impacts of different GHGs on climate and the role of biochar in reducing the GHGs emissions are discussed in Table  3 . Table 3 Role of biochar in mitigating greenhouse gases in environment Full size table Thunuguntla et al. [ 355 ] reported that poultry litter and switchgrass biochars produced at 350 and 700 °C (PLB350, PLB700, SGB350 and SGB700, respectively) affected CO 2 conversion to C2–C6 alcohols and acids by Clostridium muellerianum P21, C. ragsdalei P11 and C. carboxidivorans P7. SGB350 increased alcohol titers by 1.1–2.1 fold, and PLB350 enhanced acid concentrations by 1.2–1.7 fold compared to the control without biochar. About 2.0–3.3 fold more ethanol was formed by strain P11 compared to strains P7 and P21 with SGB350. However, strain P21 produced 2.4-fold more butanol than strain P7 with SGB350, including unique hexanol production. These results highlighted the potential of biochar in enhancing C2–C6 alcohol production from CO 2 , thereby boosting process feasibility. Olivera-Begué et al. [ 356 ] studied the effect of the addition (10% DW ratio) of wood-derived biochar on the composting of source-selected organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW). Addition of biochar significantly decreased methane (from 0.17 to 0.05 kg CH 4  Mg −1 OFMSW) and ammonia (from 0.57 to 0.35 kg NH 3  Mg −1 OFMSW) emissions over the 80 days of composting. The differences in VOC emission from the two treatments were only significant during the maturation phase (from day 50 onwards) with average values of 35 and 175 g C-VOC day −1 , for the biochar and control treatments, respectively. Odor emissions were smaller in the presence of biochar (1.1E + 0.6 vs. 1.9E + 0.6 ou Mg −1 OFMSW). The agronomic value of the resultant biochar co-compost was similar to that of the control compost. The performance of biochar, however, depends greatly on the choice of feedstock and the conditions under which it is produced. Biochar made from wood at high temperature are particularly effective for long term C storage, though they offer limited benefits for crop productivity whereas low-temperature biochar derived from nutrient-dense materials such as animal waste can significantly increase yields, especially in nutrient deficit soils. By improving water retention, enhancing nutrient availability, and long-term soil resilience, biochar has emerged as a promising approach towards climate change adaptation and mitigation [ 357 ]. Similarly, there are certain factors that affect the role of biochar in mitigating GHG emission (Fig.  7 ). By manipulating these factors, the biochar efficiency in reducing GHGs and climate change mitigation can be enhanced. 6 Effect of biochar amendments in improving plant growth and crop yield For minimizing environmental problems caused by excessive application of chemical fertilizers, reduced use of chemical fertilizers is advocated, which may often reduce actual agricultural production. Biochar has been demonstrated to regulate soil nutrient distribution due to its unique properties and significantly affect soil microbial community structure/functions. Therefore, biochar amendment in soil has emerged as a promising technology with the ability to improve soil properties, and increasing plant growth and crop yield in contaminated and problematic soils by boosting populations of beneficial microorganisms [ 65 , 72 , 358 , 359 ]. In this section, the contribution of biochar in improving plant growth and crop yield in problematic soils is discussed. To accomplish this, biochar enhances the availability of certain macro- and micro-nutrients to plants by different mechanisms (Tables 4 and 5 ). In a recent study, Palansooriya et al. [ 77 ] reviewed the role of biochar-based controlled-release fertilizers (BCRFs) in enhancing nutrient use efficiency and mitigating the environmental impact of fertilizer use in cropping systems. The BCRFs also improved soil structure and enhanced microbial activities and root growth in productive crops. BCRFs also have potential for C sequestration, mitigation of GHG emissions, reduction in nutrient leaching and environmental impact, contributing to sustainable agricultural practices compared to the use of chemical fertilizers. Thus, BCRFs offer a promising pathway for improving nutrient management in agriculture, however, interdisciplinary efforts are needed to unlock their full potential in enhancing plant growth and environmental sustainability. Table 4 Understanding the mechanisms of biochar’s role in nutrient availability and its impact on plant growth Full size table Table 5 Effect of biochar on release of specific nutrients in soil Full size table Biochar can impact nutrient availability by altering soil pH and cation exchange capacity. It can adsorb and retain nutrients, preventing leaching into surrounding environment and making them more available to plants over time. Biochar can enhance plant nutrient uptake efficiency, photosynthesis efficiency, chlorophyll content, and overall plant growth and yield. The biochar's functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carboxylic, ketone, chromene, and lactone groups strongly adsorb nutritional ions and minimize losses [ 181 ]. The effects of biochar on the availability and immobilization of nutrients in the soil varies and depends on the chemical composition of biochar, application dose, soil pH, nutrient status of soils, and microbial interaction with biochar [ 315 ]. Applications of biochar reduced NO 3 – leaching; this is because biochar has alkyl and hydroxyl functional groups. Mukherjee et al. [ 371 ] provided evidence in support of this claim, and reported a 33% decrease in NO 3 – leaching upon applying biochar at a rate of 10 g kg −1 of silty loam soil. The addition of biochar also decreased the concentration of NH 4 + in soil [ 181 ]. The amount of NH 4 + available for nitrification can decrease NH 4 + sorption to the oxygenated carbonyl and carboxyl functional groups of biochar. Increased nitrate concentration in the soil following incremental dosages of biochar has also been reported [ 372 ]. Nguyen et al. [ 373 ] described that when urea was applied along with high cation exchange capacity biochar, there was a decrease in nitrification and an increase in the abundance of genes encoding ammonia monooxygenase ( amo A gene), but not as much in low CEC biochar. Martin et al. [ 374 ] provided support for this claim,the addition of biochar increased the activity of N immobilizing heterotrophs, hence decreasing nitrification. In contrast to increasing soil nitrification and amo A gene abundance, biochar-based controlled release N-fertilizers decreased denitrification and the abundance of nitrate reductase genes ( nir S and nir K) [ 339 ]. On the other hand, it was noted that adding biochar accelerated the denitrification process, which reduced soil N [ 375 ]. After applying biochar, there was a rise in the nos Z gene, which codes for N 2 O reductase, a crucial enzyme for denitrification [ 354 ]. To further understand the effects of different levels of biochar on soil nutrient indicators, soil microorganisms and crop growth under the nitrogen-reduction condition, experiment was set up with four treatments as followed: 0%, 2.5% and 5% biochar application rates with 99 kg/hm 2  nitrogen fertilizer and one control group (the actual fertilizer standard used in the field: 110 kg/hm 2 ) without no exogenous biochar supplement [ 358 ]. It was found that a higher application rate of biochar (among 0%, 2.5% and 5% biochar) in soil cultivated with rice led to a significant increased trend in the soil pH, OM and total N content. In addition, a high concentration of biochar under nitrogen-reduction condition decreased the soil bacterial diversity but elevated the fungal diversity. These results provided a theoretical basis for exploring green and efficient fertilization strategies for increasing rice crop yields by appropriate usage of biochar under the nitrogen-reduction background. However, further research on detailed effects of biochar application on rice production is needed for analysis of the physiological functions of the soil microbes and the potential metabolic pathways. In addition, detailed metabolic differences and accurate taxa alteration at the "species" level may be determined using next-generation metagenomic technology. The impact of biochar application and its combined treatment with PGPB has been studied in numerous field studies and experiments have provided compelling evidence of the positive effects of biochar and PGPB use on plant growth and crop yield in a variety of crop types, from high-value crops like fruits and vegetables to basic cereals like rice and maize [ 42 , 69 , 376 , 377 ]. Table 6 summarizes the effect of biochar amendments either singly or along with organic matter or beneficial microorganisms on improving nutrient’s availability in soil and its impact of plant growth and crop yield. Research in various agroecosystems has demonstrated that biochar amended soils exhibit increased concentrations of essential nutrients, leading to enhanced plant vigour, root development, and ultimately, higher crop yields [ 359 ]. For instance, increased nutrient uptake, biomass and notable increases in yield of maize was favourably correlated with biochar's impact on nutrient availability, suggesting that biochar may increase the yield of staple crops [ 378 , 379 ]. Biochar addition has also been found beneficial for vegetable crops, including lettuce and tomatoes. Results showed that crops grown in soils treated with biochar had better fruit quality, increased nutritional value, higher commercial yields, and increased disease and insect resistance [ 380 , 381 ]. Similarly, use of biochar in orchards and tree plantations showed that it increased water retention in the root zone and improved nutrient availability. The improved soil structure facilitated by biochar promoted healthier root development. Increased root biomass and a larger root system are common traits of plants cultivated in soil treated with biochar [ 382 , 383 ]. Biochar has also been associated with promoting early vegetative growth and flowering in many crops [ 380 ]. Increased nutrient availability, better soil structure, and beneficial microbial interactions all contributed to accelerated growth stages, which enabled plants to reach maturity earlier and may lead to higher yields. Table 6 Effects of biochar fertilization alone or with organic matter/fertilizer, and other beneficial microbes on the nutrient contents in soil, plant growth and crop yield Full size table The combined treatment of biochar with PGPB further improved the chemical and biological properties of soil and increased plant growth and crop yields. For instance, amendment of biochar prepared from bean husk (BHB) or grape fermentation residue (GFB) with Bradyrhizobium elkanii  USDA 76 (BRA),  Burkholderia cepacia  ATCC 25416 (PRB), or  Rhizobium altiplani  BR10423 (RHI) improved soil chemical and biological properties in cowpea cultivated in poor soils [ 394 ]. BHB and PRB treatments stimulated cowpea growth, whereas GFB and PRB treatments promoted soil phosphatase activity. Different combinations of biochar and plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) increased soil pH, P, K, organic C content, and urease activity. Interestingly, biochars inoculated with the BRA ( B. elkanii  USDA 76) showed highest crop productivity and a 3.85-fold increase in productivity was observed in plants subjected to the BRA + GFB treatment as compared to the use of commercial peat. These findings highlighted the potential of biochar as an environmentally sustainable carrier of PGPB while addressing the issue of agricultural waste reuse. In another study, Chaplot et al. [ 395 ] analyzed the experimental data on the impacts of biochar application on crop yield and/or biomass production in agricultural soils. The mean biomass or grain yield gain, which was 16.1% (median at 7.1%) for all available experiments, decreased to −0.64% (median at 5.2%). Treatments of wheat ( Triticum aestivum  L.) plants with 150 mg L −1  of zinc manganese oxide nanocomposites (ZnO/MnO-NCs) (synthesized from leaf extract of  Conocarpus erectus  L.), 3% w/w corncob biochar, and PGPR strain  Bacillus flexa enhanced the morpho-physio-biochemical parameters in plants and improved growth of wheat plants, and reduced Cd toxicity [ 396 ]. However, among the bio-stimulants tested, PGPR Bacillus flexa  sp. was most effective in lowering Cd accumulation in the roots and shoots, showing a 15.35% and 17.71% increase in root length and 5.28% and 7.02% increase in shoot length compared to nanocomposites and biochar, respectively in the presence of Cd stress. It also enhanced chlorophyll content and antioxidant enzyme activities while reducing oxidative stress markers. The soil-drenching application of these bio-stimulants showed higher efficiency to improve wheat growth, crop yield and reduction in uptake of Cd stress. Metagenomic and metabolomic analyses were used to evaluate three biochar application strategies [ 66 , 67 , 68 ] and results showed that furrow-applied biochar (BR4) treatment at a reduced rate (1,875 kg ha −1 ) enhanced soil microbial structure, function, and metabolite composition, and ultimately significantly increased sesame yield by 26.57% as compared to no biochar control treatment (BR0) in continuous sesame cropping systems. The results showed that BR4 biochar treatment and surface-applied BR3 biochar treatment (@15,000 kg ha −1 ) enhanced the relative abundance of Actinomycetota while suppressing Pseudomonas in rhizosphere and non-rhizosphere soils of diseased plants. Sphingobium amiense and S. indicum were differentially abundant in BR3 and BR4 amended healthy rhizosphere soil, respectively. Biochar application significantly reduced bacterial wilt and boosts yield in continuous sesame cropping. In a recent study Silva et al. [ 376 , 397 ] inoculated five diazotrophic isolates on Brachiaria brizantha  forage systems, with biochar (as a pelletizing material) or without biochar, and plant traits and soil attributes were evaluated. All isolates increased soil K content, with the highest 39% increase in the biochar amended treatments. Soil pH and urease activity were significantly modulated by different isolates, while biomass allocation patterns differed among treatments. Overall, the results highlighted that biochar pelletization can enhance the effectiveness of diazotrophic bacteria. Machine learning (ML) revealed that dry foliar biomass, soil pH, and fresh root weight were the most predictive variables, highlighting consistent signatures explaining plant–soil responses to biochar-pelletized diazotrophic bacteria. In another experiment, Xu et al. [ 69 ] effectively immobilized the drought-tolerant PGPR ( Bacillus thuringiensis  IP3), in coconut-shell biochar and applied to masson pine ( Pinus massoniana ) conifer. The combined application of biochar and PGPR significantly increased the seedling relative water content by 40.1% relative to the control under drought stress. The co-application of biochar–PGPR agent enhanced both shoot and root growth, increased the net photosynthetic rate 7.4-fold, and raised POD activity by 74.2%, CAT activity by 66.3%, and proline content by 40.3% under drought stress. In addition, the biochar–PGPR treatment significantly improved soil nutrients, altered rhizosphere microbial composition and function, stimulated soil amino-acid and lipid metabolic pathways, and increased the relative abundances of the nutrient-cycling and biofilm-related genes. Although biochar amendment clearly improves nutrient availability, enhances biomass production, stimulates plant growth and increases crop yields in agricultural soils, a number of factors need to be taken into account to optimize its benefits and guarantee sustainable farming methods. 
 
 i. 
 
 Feedstock variation: The nutritional content and efficacy of biochar is affected by the type of biomass utilized in its formation. Understanding the differences between the nutritional profiles of biochar made from different feedstocks is essential for developing targeted soil amendments for particular crops and soil types [ 398 ]. 
 
 
 
 ii. 
 
 Application rates and timing: The optimal application rate of biochar depends on factors such as soil type, climate, and crop requirements. By using biochar at the appropriate growth stage in the crop cycle and nutrient release alignment with the plant's needs, avoid excesses or deficiencies of nutrients [ 377 ]. 
 
 
 
 iii. 
 
 Interactions with other soil amendments: Biochar is frequently combined with other soil amendments, including mineral nutrients or organic fertilizers for enhancing plant growth and crop yield. Designing of successful nutrient management strategies requires an understanding of the synergies or possible conflicts between biochar and these amendments [ 399 ]. 
 
 
 7 Constraints in development, application and marketability of biochar The development, application, and marketability of biochar, despite its promising attributes, face several constraints that hinder its widespread adoption and integration into mainstream agricultural practices. These constraints span technological, economic, and social dimensions, requiring careful consideration for the effective utilization of biochar in addressing environmental and agricultural challenges [ 400 ]. One of the primary challenges associated with use of biochar is the cost of production. The pyrolysis process, which transforms biomass into biochar, requires energy inputs and specialized equipment, contributing to production costs. Scaling up production to meet the demands of large agricultural areas can be economically challenging. As a result, the cost-effectiveness of biochar production needs improvement to ensure its accessibility to a broader range of farmers [ 400 , 401 ]. Availability and variability of feedstock also pose challenges in maintaining consistent biochar quality as the type of biomass used as feedstock for biochar production significantly influences its properties. Different feedstocks yield biochars with distinct physical and chemical characteristics, impacting their effectiveness in soil amendment [ 402 ]. Addressing this challenge requires research into optimizing biochar production from diverse feedstocks while ensuring reliability and uniformity. In addition, the absence of standardized protocols and certification procedures for biochar products hampers marketability and consumer confidence. The lack of clear quality standards makes it difficult for farmers to choose biochar products that meet specific needs [ 403 ]. Establishing industry-wide standards and certification processes is crucial for fostering trust among users and facilitating the adoption of biochar on a larger scale [ 75 ]. Although laboratory and greenhouse studies show encouraging results, applying biochar at the field scale is not always straightforward. Its performance can very widely depending on differences in soil conditions, climate conditions and crop management practices. Applying biochar at the field scale is influenced by various practical and environmental factors such as soil variability, as soil properties vary across a field leading to uneven crop responses after biochar application. This makes it important to adopt site-specific strategies that are according to local soil conditions [ 404 , 405 ]. In addition, the cost of producing and transporting biochar in large quantities can also be a major limitation, especially for farmers with limited resources. Using locally available feedstocks offer a more practical and cost-effective solution [ 406 , 407 ]. Another key limitation is the way biochar is applied in the field. If it is not evenly distributed, the benefits can vary across the field, leading to inconsistent results. Thus, mechanized application can help achieve more uniform results [ 408 ]. There is also limited information on how biochar behaves over the long-term under field conditions, particularly in terms of nutrient cycling in soil, microbial activity and possible accumulation effects. To improve its practical use, biochar should be integrated with existing soil management practices, such as composting, integrated nutrient management and conservation agriculture [ 409 , 410 ]. Another major constraint in the application of biochar is the risk of its contamination with HMs (e.g., Cd, Pb, Zn), which is particularly relevant when biochar is produced from wastes containing such pollutants such as sewage sludge, swine manure or industrial residues [ 411 , 412 ]. Also, incomplete pyrolysis process can result in the formation of toxic compounds like polycyslic aromatic hydrocarbons [ 413 ] and VOCs, which may affect soil biota and plants. Other pollutants such as environmental persistant free radicles (EPFRs) present with biochar can induce production of reactive oxygen species, which can destabilize cell membranes and induce apoptosis resulting in repressed growth [ 414 ]. Besides all these factors, some studies indicate that weathering and aging of biochar can lead to formation of nanobiochar [ 411 , 415 ], which can transport pollutants with it more quickly in environment. Biochar is often regarded as a cost-effective option for soil remediation. However, its ability to act both as a sink and a potential source of pollutants forces us to limit its use. The lack of awareness among farmers and landowners about the potential benefits of biochar is another major constraint in agriculture-based countries. Further, the use of biochar is still relatively novel, and farmers may be hesitant to adopt a technology that involves altering traditional agricultural practices. Concerns about potential side effects, uncertainties about long-term impacts, and the perceived risks associated with biochar use can deter farmers from incorporating it into their farming systems [ 416 , 417 ]. Adequate training and outreach programs are needed to raise awareness about biochar's efficacy in improving soil fertility, enhancing plant growth, and mitigating environmental issues [ 416 ]. Further, the integration of biochar into conventional farming practices may face resistance due to established norms and routines. Demonstrating the compatibility of biochar with existing agricultural systems and highlighting its ease of application is essential for overcoming barriers to its adoption. Bridging this knowledge gap is essential for encouraging widespread adoption of biochar application in the crops [ 418 ]. Besides this, there is a need for more crop-specific research to optimize its application for different agricultural systems. Variability in soil types, climates, and crop requirements necessitates targeted investigations to determine the most effective biochar application rates, timing, and integration strategies for various crops. Building the necessary infrastructure, including pyrolysis facilities and distribution networks, is crucial for making biochar readily available to farmers. Investments in infrastructure development can contribute to overcoming this constraint. Overcoming these challenges requires a multidimensional approach involving technological innovation, education and outreach, policy support, and collaborative efforts among researchers, farmers and industry stakeholders. Addressing these constraints is essential to unlock the full potential of biochar as a sustainable and effective solution in the realm of agriculture and environmental management. 8 Conclusions and future perspectives This study highlights the significant potential of biochar as a sustainable alternative for improving soil physical properties, enhancing carbon sequestration and mitigating greenhouse gases. The article clearly describes that the effectiveness of biochar is strongly influenced by feedstock type, pyrolysis conditions and soil properties. Also, the role of biochar in stabilizing carbon through physicochemical protection and microbial interactions, demonstrates its importance in mitigating climate changes. The future perspectives of biochar hold immense promise to address pressing challenges in agriculture, environmental sustainability and climate change mitigation. Biochar's role in carbon sequestration presents a significant opportunity to mitigate climate change. By converting biomass into a stable form of C through pyrolysis, biochar locks away carbon in the soil, reducing atmospheric CO 2 levels. As governments and industries increasingly focus on carbon–neutral practices, biochar stands out as a valuable tool in the arsenal of climate change mitigation strategies. Other than this, its ability to improve soil structure, retaining nutrients, and stimulation of microbial activity contributes to sustainable agriculture. As global demand for food continues to rise, incorporating biochar into farming practices can lead to increased crop yields, improved soil resilience, and reduced dependence on chemical fertilizers [ 381 ]. Biochar production provides an avenue for recycling organic waste materials, turning them into a valuable resource. Agricultural residues, forestry by-products, and organic waste can be converted into biochar, reducing the environmental impact of waste disposal. This aligns with the principles of a circular economy, where waste is transformed into a resource, contributing to a more sustainable and environmentally friendly approach to waste management. Besides this, biochar's ability to adsorb pollutants can be exploited for water pollution treatment also. Application in water treatment can help improve water quality by capturing and removing contaminants. This makes biochar a potential solution for addressing water pollution in agricultural runoff and mitigating the impacts of industrial activities on water resources. Despite these promising outcomes, several challenges remain. Technologically, there is a need to optimize pyrolysis processes to ensure consistant biochar quality while keeping in view the issues related to feedstock variability and large-scale production. Ongoing research and technological advancements are likely to refine biochar production processes, enhancing efficiency and reducing costs [ 402 ]. Innovations in feedstock selection, pyrolysis techniques, and the development of designer biochars with specific properties for targeted applications will further optimize the efficacy of biochar in diverse contexts. The biochar market has many different opportunities, which can reduce risks and expand its overall potential. However, this diversity can also make it harder for new businesses to stay focused, especially in the early stages. Small but profitable niche markets—such as horticulture, nurseries, water treatment, and energy-related uses -are often the best starting points. For entrepreneurs with limited resources, focusing on one specific market at the beginning is important to find the right product-market fit. Even after choosing a target market, there are still challenges and barriers that can slow growth or affect business success. Therefore, it is essential for biochar producers to identify these challenges early and plan effective strategies to overcome these problems [ 419 ]. In conclusion, the future perspectives of biochar are bright, with the potential to revolutionize agriculture, its contribution to climate change mitigation, and in addressing waste management challenges. As research continues to uncover its diverse applications and benefits, the integration of biochar into mainstream practices holds the key to a more sustainable and resilient future for agriculture and the environment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Data availability 
 
 No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study. 
 References Kopittke PM, Menzies NW, Wang P, McKenna BA, Lombi E. Soil and the intensification of agriculture for global food security. Environ Int. 2019;132:105078. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ortiz-Bobea A, Ault TR, Carrillo CM, Chambers RG, Lobell DB. Anthropogenic climate change has slowed global agricultural productivity growth. Nat Clim Change. 2021;11(4):306–12. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Arnell NW, Lowe JA, Challinor AJ, Osborn TJ. Global and regional impacts of climate change at different levels of global temperature increase. Clim Change. 2019;155:377–91. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Walker AP, De Kauwe MG, Bastos A, Belmecheri S, Georgiou K, Keeling RF, et al. Integrating the evidence for a terrestrial carbon sink caused by increasing atmospheric CO 2 . New Phytol. 2021;229(5):2413–45. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Cook BI, Mankin JS, Anchukaitis KJ. Climate change and drought: from past to future. Curr Clim Change Rep. 2018;4:164–79. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Kumar S, Sindhu SS. Drought stress mitigation through bioengineering of microbes and crop varieties for sustainable agriculture and food security. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2024;7:100285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crmicr.2024.100285 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mukherjee S, Mishra A, Trenberth KE. Climate change and drought: a perspective on drought indices. Curr Clim Change Rep. 2018;4:145–63. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Barry D, Hoyne S. Sustainable measurement indicators to assess impacts of climate change: implications for the New Green deal era. Curr Opin Environ Sci Health. 2021;22:100259. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Biesbroek R, Wright SJ, Eguren SK, Bonotto A, Athanasiadis IN. Policy attention to climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: a global assessment of national communications (1994–2019). Clim Policy. 2022;22(1):97–111. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Pörtner HO, Roberts DC, Adams H, Adler C, Aldunce P, Ali E, et al. Climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. IPCC; 2022. 
 Google Scholar 
 Cahyana D, Karolinoerita V, Manurung ED, Wulanningtyas HS. Bridging the conceptual gap between soil quality and soil health for one health. Soil Secur. 2026;22:100219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soisec.2025.100219 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Kumar S, Sindhu SS. Microbiome-mediated nitrogen cycling in soil: impact on nitrogen use efficiency, crop production and environmental sustainability. Soil Secur. 2026;22(3):100225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soisec.2026.100225 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lahlali R, Kouighat M, Khadiri M, Boutagayout A, Özer G, Laasli S-E, et al. Biopesticides for a sustainable agriculture: prospects and challenges in disease management. Physiol Mol Plant Pathol. 2026;142:103096. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmpp.2025.103096 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Shivangi, Singh O, Shahi UP, Dhayni BP, Singh PK, Singh KK, et al. Next-generation nutrient management strategies for rice: enhancing productivity and soil quality for sustainable development. J Innov Solut Eco-Environ Sustain. 2025;1(1):13508. https://doi.org/10.46991/JISEES.2025.01.1.13508 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Chaudhary S, Bhatia T, Sindhu SS. Sustainable approach for management of organic waste agri-residues in soils for food production and pollution mitigation. In: Bhat SA, Kumar V, Li F, Ameen F, Kumar S, editors. Environmental nexus approach: management of water, waste, and soil. Boca Raton FL, USA: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC; 2025. p. 355–86. 
 Google Scholar 
 Saharan BS, Dhanda D, Mandal NK, Kumar R, Sharma D, Sadh PK, et al. Microbial contributions to sustainable paddy straw utilization for economic gain and environmental conservation. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2024;7:100264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crmicr.2024.100264 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li Y, Awasthi MK, Sindhu R, Binod P, Zhang Z, Taherzadeh MJ. Biochar preparation and evaluation of its effect in composting mechanism: a review. Bioresour Technol. 2023;384:129329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129329 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Parshad J, Kumar R, Chhokar V, Patil N, Beniwal V, Singh N, et al. Rice residue management: alternative strategies and emerging technologies for a sustainable ecosystem. Pedosphere. 2025;35(1):53–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedsph.2024.06.004 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Piechota P, Unpaprom Y, Dong CD, Kumar G. Recent advances in biowaste management towards sustainable environment. Bioresour Technol. 2023;368:128326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.128326 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Verma N, Wati L, Sindhu SS, Goyal S. Organic waste utilization for production of compost and biofuel. In: Nagpal R, Kumar A, Singh R, editors. Microbes in the service of mankind: tiny bugs with huge impact. New Delhi: JBC Press; 2014. p. 95–124. 
 Google Scholar 
 Goyal S, Sindhu SS. Composting of rice straw using different inocula and analysis of compost quality. Microbiol J. 2011;1:126–138. https://doi.org/10.3923/mj.2011.126.138 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Meena SK, Singh RD, Raju M, Pandian PS, Sritharan N, Selvam S. Agricultural bio-waste recycling through efficient microbial consortia. J Appl Nat Sci. 2023;15:349–55. https://doi.org/10.31018/jans.v15i1.4304 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhou SP, Ke X, Jin LQ, Xue YP, Zheng YG. Sustainable management and valorization of biomass wastes using synthetic microbial consortia. Bioresour Technol. 2024;395:130391. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2024.130391 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Das S, Mohanty S, Sahu G, Rana M, Pilli K. Biochar: a sustainable approach for improving soil health and environment. Soil Eros Curr Chall Future Perspect Chang World. 2021;1:5772. 
 Google Scholar 
 Foong SY, Cheong KY, Kong SH, Yiin CL, Yek PNY, Safdar R, et al. Recent progress in the production and application of biochar and its composite in environmental biodegradation. Bioresour Technol. 2023;387:129592. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129592 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Oni BA, Oziegbe O, Olawole OO. Significance of biochar application to the environment and economy. Ann Agric Sci. 2019;64(2):222–36. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xu L, Wu KC, Deng ZN, Huang CM, Verma KK, Pang T, et al. Biochar and its impact on soil profile and plant development. J Plant Interact. 2024. https://doi.org/10.1080/17429145.2024.2401356 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ahmed MB, Zhou JL, Ngo HH, Guo W. Insight into biochar properties and its cost analysis. Biomass Bioenerg. 2016;84:76–86. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ge S, Foong SY, Ma NL, Liew RK, Mahari WAW, Xia C, et al. Vacuum pyrolysis incorporating microwave heating and base mixture modification: an integrated approach to transform biowaste into eco-friendly bioenergy products. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2020;127:109871. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lehmann J. Bio-energy in the black. Front Ecol Environ. 2007;5(7):381–7. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lehmann J. A handful of carbon. Nature. 2007;447(7141):143–4. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Weber K, Quicker P. Properties of biochar. Fuel. 2018;217:240–61. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Cheng CH, Lehmann J, Engelhard MH. Natural oxidation of black carbon in soils: changes in molecular form and surface charge along a climosequence. Geochim Cosmochim Acta. 2008;72(6):1598–610. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Cheng CH, Lehmann J, Thies JE, Burton SD. Stability of black carbon in soils across a climatic gradient. J Geophys Res Biogeosci, 2008;113(G2). Mašek O, Brownsort P, Cross A, Sohi S. Influence of production conditions on the yield and environmental stability of biochar. Fuel. 2013;103:151–5. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Nepal J, Ahmad W, Munsif F, Khan A, Zou Z. Advances and prospects of biochar in improving soil fertility, biochemical quality, and environmental applications. Front Environ Sci. 2023;11:1114752. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lehmann J, Gaunt J, Rondon M. Biochar sequestration in terrestrial ecosystems—a review. Mitig Adapt Strat Glob Change. 2006;11:403–27. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ling JLJ, Go ES, Park YK, Lee SH. Recent advances of hybrid solar-biomass thermo-chemical conversion systems. Chemosphere. 2022;290:133245. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ling L, Luo Y, Jiang B, Lv J, Meng C, Liao Y, et al. Biochar induces mineralization of soil recalcitrant components by activation of biochar responsive bacteria groups. Soil Biol Biochem. 2022;172:108778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2022.108778 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhanga A, Biana R, Pana G, Cuia L, Hussaina Q, Li L, et al. Effects of biochar amendment on soil quality, crop yield and greenhouse gas emission in a Chinese rice paddy: a field study of two consecutive rice growing cycles. Field Crop Res. 2010;127:153–60. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gaunt JL, Lehmann J. Energy balance and emissions associated with biochar sequestration and pyrolysis bioenergy production. Environ Sci Technol. 2008;42(11):4152–8. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Jiang P, Huang H, Hu J, Wang L, Zhang Y, Rong X, et al. Biochar and manure amendments mitigate chemical-fertilizer-induce negative effects on soil microbiomes, with implications for crop productivity gain. Appl Soil Ecol. 2026;220:106858. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsoil.2026.106858 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhao L, Cao X, Wang Q, Yang F, Xu S. Mineral constituents profile of biochar derived from diversified waste biomasses: implications for agricultural applications. J Environ Qual. 2013;42(2):545–52. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Meng J, Cui Z, Li Z, Li J, Hu M, Xu J, et al. Biochar orchestrates coordinated soil-microbe-metabolite responses in acidifying paddy soils: evidence from a 5-year field study. Biochar. 2026;8:83. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42773-026-00598-9 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Brewer CE, Unger R, Schmidt-Rohr K, Brown RC, Joseph S. Comprehensive characterization of biochar: Structural and chemical properties. Agricultural Food Chem. 2011;59:10488–98. 
 Google Scholar 
 Masulili A, Utomo WH, Syechfani MS. Rice husk biochar for rice based cropping system in acid soil 1. The characteristics of rice husk biochar and its influence on the properties of acid sulfate soils and rice growth in West Kalimantan, Indonesia. J Agric Sci. 2010;2(1):39. 
 Google Scholar 
 Sparkes J, Stoutjesdijk P. Biochar: implications for agricultural productivity. ABARES; 2011. p. 1–63. 
 Google Scholar 
 Sui L, Tang C, Cheng K, Yang F. Biochar addition regulates soil phosphorus fractions and improves release of available phosphorus under freezing-thawing cycles. Sci Total Environ. 2022;848:157748. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xu M, Sun Q, Liu Q, He G, Wang C, He K. Biochar decreases fertilizer leaching and promotes miscanthus growth in saline-alkaline soil. Plants (Basel). 2023;12(20):3649. CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mensah W, Ewusi-Mensah N, Ulzen J, Ulzen OO, Ayamah A. Potential of biochar-based inoculant in enhancing rhizobia survival and grain yield of cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata (L.). Agrosyst Geosci Environ. 2025;8:e70161. https://doi.org/10.1002/agg2.70161 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wan H, Chen Y, Cui B, Liu X, Hou J, Wei Z, et al. Biochar amendment increases C and N retention in the soil–plant systems: its implications in enhancing plant growth and water-use efficiency under reduced irrigation regimes of maize ( Zea mays L.). J Soil Sci Plant Nutr. 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-023-01223-5 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ippolito JA, Cui L, Kammann C, Wrage-Mönnig N, Estavillo JM, Fuertes-Mendizabal T, et al. Feedstock choice, pyrolysis temperature and type influence biochar characteristics: a comprehensive meta-analysis review. Biochar. 2020;2(4):421–38. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Novak JM, Lima I, Xing B, Gaskin JW, Steiner C, Das KC, et al. Characterization of designer biochar produced at different temperatures and their effects on a loamy sand. Ann Environ Sci. 2009;3:195. CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xiong C, Ge AH, Gao M, Singh BK. Impacts of climate extremes on plant pathogens, microbiomes and plant health. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2026. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-026-01290-2 . Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xiong Y, Lin R, Wang Y, Liu K, Guo J, Wu M, et al. Selective application of biochars to realize biochar–microbe synergistic immobilization of soil cadmium. Environ Biogeochem Process. 2026. https://doi.org/10.48130/ebp-0025-0019 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gong X, Li S, Wu Z, Alhaj Hamoud Y, Shaghaleh H, Kalkhajeh YK, et al. Biochar enhances soil resource availability and suppresses microbial metabolism genes in the rhizosphere of wheat. Life. 2023;13:1843. https://doi.org/10.3390/life13091843 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ahmad M, Lee SS, Dou X, Mohan D, Sung JK, Yang JE, et al. Effects of pyrolysis temperature on soybean stover-and peanut shell-derived biochar properties and TCE adsorption in water. Bioresour Technol. 2012;118:536–44. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ahmad M, Lee SS, Yang JE, Ro HM, Lee YH, Ok YS. Effects of soil dilution and amendments (mussel shell, cow bone, and biochar) on Pb availability and phytotoxicity in military shooting range soil. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2012;79:225–31. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhang J, Liu J, Liu R. Effects of pyrolysis temperature and heating time on biochar obtained from the pyrolysis of straw and lignosulfonate. Bioresour Technol. 2015;176:288–91. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gaskin J, Steiner C, Harris K, Das KC, Bibens B. Effect of low-temperature pyrolysis conditions on biochar for agricultural use. Trans ASABE. 2008;51(6):2061–9. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Uchimiya M, Hiradate S. Pyrolysis temperature-dependent changes in dissolved phosphorus speciation of plant and manure biochars. J Agric Food Chem. 2014;62(8):1802–9. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zornoza R, Moreno-Barriga F, Acosta JA, Muñoz MA, Faz A. Stability, nutrient availability and hydrophobicity of biochars derived from manure, crop residues, and municipal solid waste for their use as soil amendments. Chemosphere. 2016;144:122–30. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li H, Lin L, Peng Y, Hao Y, Li Z, Li J, et al. Biochar’s dual role in greenhouse gas emissions: nitrogen fertilization dependency and mitigation potential. Sci Total Environ. 2024;917:170293. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li H, Lou J, Chen X, Dou Y, Zhang D, Wei M. Effects of sweet pepper straw biochar on soil microbial communities and growth of continuously cropped cucumber. Ann Microbiol. 2024;74:12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13213-024-01755-w . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Shang W, Razavi BS, Yao S, Hao C, Kuzyakov Y, Blagodatskaya E, et al. Contrasting mechanisms of nutrient mobilization in rhizosphere hotspots driven by straw and biochar amendment. Soil Biol Biochem. 2023;187:109212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2023.109212 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wang R, Lyu F, Lyu R, He J, Wei L. Mechanisms of furrow-applied biochar in enhancing rhizosphere soil microbiota and metabolites in continuous sesame cropping. Eur J Soil Biol. 2025;126:103763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejsobi.2025.103763 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wang S, Zhang T, Jahan I, Pan B, Cai Y, Cai K. Silicon-modified biochar suppresses bacterial wilt and enhances rhizosphere soil health via microbiome modulation and carbon sequestration. Plant Soil. 2025. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-025-07748-1 . Article 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wang W, Liu Y, Zhao Z, Liu R, Wang F, Zhang Z, et al. Moss biochar facilitates root colonization of halotolerant Halomonas salifodinae for promoting plant growth under saline–alkali stress. Soil Syst. 2025;9(3):73. https://doi.org/10.3390/soilsystems9030073 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xu H, Luo R, Zhou W, Yu C. Biochar–PGPR combination modulates physiology and rhizosphere microenvironment to improve drought resistance of Pinus massoniana seedlings. Plant Soil. 2026. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11104-026-08439-1 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sindhu SS, Verma N, Goyal S. Ecofriendly utilization of crop residues and organic waste material. In: Garg SR, editor. Human and animal health: environmental perspectives. New Delhi: Satish Serial Publishing House; 2013. p. 385–404. 
 Google Scholar 
 Nawaz F, Rafeeq R, Majeed S, et al. Biochar amendment in combination with endophytic bacteria stimulates photosynthetic activity and antioxidant enzymes to improve soybean yield under drought stress. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr. 2023;23:746–60. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-022-01079-1 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Yan Z, Xing Y, Ma C, Li X, Duan Y, Wang X, et al. Biochar and PGPR influence rhizosphere bacteria and synergistically regulate tomato seedling biomass under greenhouse conditions. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr. 2025. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-025-02441-9 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Majumdar A, Roychowdhury T, Kotta-Loizou I, Buck M. Molecular insights into PGPR-biochar–mediated arsenic detoxification and nutritional enhancement in rice rhizospheres. BioRxiv. 2025. https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.11.669651 . Article 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Supraja KV, Kachroo H, Viswanathan G, Verma VK, Behera B, Doddapaneni TRKC, et al. Biochar production and its environmental applications: recent developments and machine learning insights. Bioresour Technol. 2023;387:129634. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129634 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Babu S, Singh R, Kumar S, Rathore SS, Yadav D, Yadav SK, et al. Biochar implications in cleaner agricultural production and environmental sustainability. Environ Sci Adv. 2023;2(8):1042–59. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2va00324d . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sun T, Sun Y, Huang Q, Xu Y, Jia H. Sustainable exploitation and safe utilization of biochar: multiphase characterization and potential hazard analysis. Bioresour Technol. 2023;383:129241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129241 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Palansooriya KN, Dissanayake PD, El-Naggar A, Gayesha E, Wijesekara H, Krishnamoorthy N, et al. Biochar-based controlled-release fertilizers for enhancing plant growth and environmental sustainability: a review. Biol Fertil Soils. 2025;61:701–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-025-01888-3 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wijitkosum S. Biochar derived from agricultural wastes and wood residues for sustainable agricultural and environmental applications. Int Soil Water Conserv Res. 2022;10(2):335–41. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Fu MM, Mo CH, Li H, Zhang YN, Huang WX, Wong MH. Comparison of physicochemical properties of biochars and hydrochars produced from food wastes. J Clean Prod. 2019;236:117637. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Kloss S, Zehetner F, Dellantonio A, Hamid R, Ottner F, Liedtke V, et al. Characterization of slow pyrolysis biochars: effects of feedstocks and pyrolysis temperature on biochar properties. J Environ Qual. 2012;41(4):990–1000. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sriburi T, Wijitkosum S. Biochar amendment experiments in Thailand: practical examples. Cambridge University Press; 2016. p. 368–89. 
 Google Scholar 
 Guizani C, Jeguirim M, Valin S, Peyrot M, Salvador S. The heat treatment severity index: a new metric correlated to the properties of biochars obtained from entrained flow pyrolysis of biomass. Fuel. 2019;244:61–8. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Shaaban A, Se SM, Mitan NMM, Dimin MF. Characterization of biochar derived from rubber wood sawdust through slow pyrolysis on surface porosities and functional groups. Proc Eng. 2013;68:365–71. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wijitkosum S, Sriburi T. Increasing the amount of biomass in field crops for carbon sequestration and plant biomass enhancement using biochar. In: Biochar—an imperative amendment for soil and the environment. IntechOpen; 2018. p. 1–13. 
 Google Scholar 
 Bhatia T, Sindhu SS. Sustainable management of organic agricultural wastes: contributions in nutrients availability, pollution mitigation and crop production. Discov Agric. 2024;2:130. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44279-024-00147-7 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lee Y, Park J, Gang K, Ryu C, Yang W, Jung J, Hyun S. Production and characterization of biochar from various biomass materials by slow pyrolysis. Technical Bulletin-Food and Fertilizer Technology Center, 2013;197. Sharma P, Marinov I, Cabre A, Kostadinov T, Singh A. Increasing biomass in the warm oceans: unexpected new insights from SeaWiFS. Geophys Res Lett. 2019;46(7):3900–10. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wang S, Dai G, Yang H, Luo Z. Lignocellulosic biomass pyrolysis mechanism: a state-of-the-art review. Prog Energy Combust Sci. 2017;62:33–86. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 FAO. Retrieved 05.18. 2022., from food and agricultural organization. 2021. Seo JY, Tokmurzin D, Lee D, Lee SH, Seo MW, Park YK. Production of biochar from crop residues and its application for biofuel production processes—an overview. Bioresour Technol. 2022;361:127740. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Porichha GK, Hu Y, Rao KTV, Xu CC. Crop residue management in India: stubble burning vs. other utilizations including bioenergy. Energies. 2021;14(14):4281. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Nematian M, Keske C, Ng’ombe JN. A techno-economic analysis of biochar production and the bioeconomy for orchard biomass. Waste Manag. 2021;135:467–77. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rex P, Mohammed Ismail KR, Meenakshisundaram N, Barmavatu P, Sai Bharadwaj AVSL. Agricultural biomass waste to biochar: a review on biochar applications using machine learning approach and circular economy. Chem Eng. 2023;7(3):50. CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Harindintwali JD, Zhou J, Yu X. Lignocellulosic crop residue composting by cellulolytic nitrogen-fixing bacteria: a novel tool for environmental sustainability. Sci Total Environ. 2020;715:136912. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Divyangkumar N, Panwar NL. Optimizing high performance biochar from sugarcane bagasse and corncob via vacuum pyrolysis. Energy 360. 2025;3:100014. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wu Y, Li X, Li F, Ling Z, Meng Y, Chen F, et al. Promising seawater hydrothermal combining electro-assisted pretreatment for corn stover valorization within a biorefinery concept. Bioresour Technol. 2022;351:127066. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Swain MR, Singh A, Sharma AK, Tuli DK. Bioethanol production from rice-and wheat straw: an overview. In: Bioethanol production from food crops. 2019. p. 213–31. Chapter 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Adekunle JO, Ibrahim JS, Kucha EI. Proximate and ultimate analyses of biocoal briquettes of Nigerian’s Ogboyaga and Okaba sub-bituminous coal. Br J Appl Sci Technol. 2015;7(1):114–23. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Dhyani V, Bhaskar T. A comprehensive review on the pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass. Renew Energy. 2018;129:695–716. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tagade A, Kirti N, Sawarkar AN. Pyrolysis of agricultural crop residues: an overview of researches by Indian scientific community. Bioresour Technol Rep. 2021;15:100761. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ganeshan G, Shadangi KP, Mohanty K. Thermo-chemical conversion of mango seed kernel and shell to value added products. J Anal Appl Pyrolysis. 2016;121:403–8. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Haeldermans T, Campion L, Kuppens T, Vanreppelen K, Cuypers A, Schreurs S. A comparative techno-economic assessment of biochar production from different residue streams using conventional and microwave pyrolysis. Bioresour Technol. 2020;318:124083. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rasool T, Srivastava VC, Khan MNS. Utilisation of a waste biomass, walnut shells, to produce bio-products via pyrolysis: investigation using ISO-conversional and neural network methods. Biomass Convers Biorefinery. 2018;8:647–57. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Babu S, Rathore SS, Singh R, Kumar S, Singh VK, Yadav SK, et al. Exploring agricultural waste biomass for energy, food and feed production and pollution mitigation: a review. Bioresour Technol. 2022;360:127566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.127566 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ramzan H, Usman M, Nadeem F, Shahzaib M, Ur Rahman M, Singhania RR, et al. Depolymerization of lignin: recent progress towards value-added chemicals and biohydrogen production. Bioresour Technol. 2023;386:129492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129492 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tagade A, Sawarkar AN. Valorization of millet agro-residues for bioenergy production through pyrolysis: recent inroads, technological bottlenecks, possible remedies, and future direction. Bioresour Technol. 2023;384:129335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129335 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sonwai A, Pholchan P, Tippayawong N. Machine learning approach for determining and optimizing influential factors of biogas production from lignocellulosic biomass. Bioresour Technol. 2023;383:129235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129235 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Yadav A, Sharma V, Tsai M-L, Chen C-W, Sun P-P, Nargotra P, et al. Development of lignocellulosic biorefineries for the sustainable production of biofuels: towards circular bioeconomy. Bioresour Technol. 2023;381:129145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.129145 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhao N, Zhao C, Lv Y, Zhang W, Du Y, Hao Z, et al. Adsorption and coadsorption mechanisms of Cr (VI) and organic contaminants on H 3 PO 4 treated biochar. Chemosphere. 2017;186:422–9. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Kong SH, Loh SK, Bachmann RT, Rahim SA, Salimon J. Biochar from oil palm biomass: a review of its potential and challenges. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2014;39:729–39. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tomczyk A, Sokołowska Z, Boguta P. Biochar physicochemical properties: pyrolysis temperature and feedstock kind effects. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol. 2020;19:191–215. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Patel A, Agrawal B, Rawal BR. Pyrolysis of biomass for efficient extraction of biofuel. Energy Sources Recovery Util Environ Eff. 2020;42(13):1649–61. 
 Google Scholar 
 Pei-dong Z, Guomei J, Gang W. Contribution to emission reduction of CO 2 and SO 2 by household biogas construction in rural China. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2007;11(8):1903–12. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Thornley P, Upham P, Huang Y, Rezvani S, Brammer J, Rogers J. Integrated assessment of bioelectricity technology options. Energy Policy. 2009;37(3):890–903. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Premalatha N, Prathiba R, Miranda MA, Miranda LR. Pyrolysis of polypropylene waste using sulfonated carbon catalyst synthesized from sugarcane bagasse. J Mater Cycles Waste Manag. 2021;23:1002–14. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Armah EK, Chetty M, Adedeji JA, Estrice DE, Mutsvene B, Singh N, et al. Biochar: production, application and the future. In: Biochar: productive technologies, properties and application. IntechOpen; 2022. 
 Google Scholar 
 Zimmerman AR, Gao B, Ahn MY. Positive and negative carbon mineralization priming effects among a variety of biochar-amended soils. Soil Biol Biochem. 2011;43(6):1169–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2011.02.005 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gabhane JW, Bhange VP, Patil PD, Bankar ST, Kumar S. Recent trends in biochar production methods and its application as a soil health conditioner: a review. SN Appl Sci. 2020;2:1–21. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li H, Li Y, Xu Y, Lu X. Biochar phosphorus fertilizer effects on soil phosphorus availability. Chemosphere. 2020;244:125471. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.125471 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li W, Wanninayake N, Gao X, Li M, Pu Y, Kim DY, et al. Mechanistic insight into lignin slow pyrolysis by linking pyrolysis chemistry and carbon material properties. ACS Sustain Chem Eng. 2020;8(42):15843–54. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Liu WJ, Jiang H, Yu HQ. Development of biochar-based functional materials: toward a sustainable platform carbon material. Chem Rev. 2015;115(22):12251–85. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Al Arni S. Comparison of slow and fast pyrolysis for converting biomass into fuel. Renew Energy. 2018;124:197–201. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Yogalakshmi KN, Sivashanmugam P, Kavitha S, Kannah Y, Varjani S, AdishKumar S, et al. Lignocellulosic biomass-based pyrolysis: a comprehensive review. Chemosphere. 2022;286:131824. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Dabros TM, Stummann MZ, Høj M, Jensen PA, Grunwaldt JD, Gabrielsen J, et al. Transportation fuels from biomass fast pyrolysis, catalytic hydrodeoxygenation, and catalytic fast hydropyrolysis. Prog Energy Combust Sci. 2018;68:268–309. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Chang C, Liu Z, Li P, Wang X, Song J, Fang S, et al. Study on products characteristics from catalytic fast pyrolysis of biomass based on the effects of modified biochars. Energy. 2021;229:120818. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Chang Y, Rossi L, Zotarelli L, Gao B, Shahid MA, Sarkhosh A. Biochar improves soil physical characteristics and strengthens root architecture in Muscadine grape ( Vitis rotundifolia L.). Chem Biol Technol Agric. 2021;8:1–11. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Dai L, Fan L, Liu Y, Ruan R, Wang Y, Zhou Y, et al. Production of bio-oil and biochar from soapstock via microwave-assisted co-catalytic fast pyrolysis. Bioresour Technol. 2017;225:1–8. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Dai Z, Zhang X, Tang C, Muhammad N, Wu J, Brookes PC, et al. Potential role of biochars in decreasing soil acidification-a critical review. Sci Total Environ. 2017;581:601–11. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Huang YF, Chiueh PT, Kuan WH, Lo SL. Microwave pyrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass: heating performance and reaction kinetics. Energy. 2016;100:137–44. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Demirbas A, Arin G. An overview of biomass pyrolysis. Energy Sources Part A. 2002;24(5):471–82. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ghodake GS, Shinde SK, Kadam AA, Saratale RG, Saratale GD, Kumar M, et al. Review on biomass feedstocks, pyrolysis mechanism and physicochemical properties of biochar: state-of-the-art framework to speed up vision of circular bioeconomy. J Clean Prod. 2021;297:126645. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lam SS, Lee XY, Nam WL, Phang XY, Liew RK, Yek PN, et al. Microwave vacuum pyrolysis conversion of waste mushroom substrate into biochar for use as growth medium in mushroom cultivation. J Chem Technol Biotechnol. 2019;94(5):1406–15. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tripathi M, Sahu JN, Ganesan P. Effect of process parameters on production of biochar from biomass waste through pyrolysis: a review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2016;55:467–81. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Carrier M, Hugo T, Gorgens J, Knoetze H. Comparison of slow and vacuum pyrolysis of sugar cane bagasse. J Anal Appl Pyrol. 2011;90(1):18–26. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Yazdani E, Hashemabadi SH, Taghizadeh A. Study of waste tire pyrolysis in a rotary kiln reactor in a wide range of pyrolysis temperature. Waste Manag. 2019;85:195–201. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Borel LD, Lira TS, Ribeiro JA, Ataíde CH, Barrozo MA. Pyrolysis of brewer’s spent grain: kinetic study and products identification. Ind Crops Prod. 2018;121:388–95. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Stummann MZ, Høj M, Gabrielsen J, Clausen LR, Jensen PA, Jensen AD. A perspective on catalytic hydropyrolysis of biomass. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2021;143:110960. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Galiasso R, González Y, Lucena M. New inverted cyclone reactor for flash hydropyrolysis. Catal Today. 2014;220:186–97. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sekar M, Mathimani T, Alagumalai A, Chi NTL, Duc PA, Bhatia SK, et al. A review on the pyrolysis of algal biomass for biochar and bio-oil–bottlenecks and scope. Fuel. 2021;283:119190. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Thangalazhy-Gopakumar S, Adhikari S, Gupta RB, Tu M, Taylor S. Production of hydrocarbon fuels from biomass using catalytic pyrolysis under helium and hydrogen environments. Bioresour Technol. 2011;102(12):6742–9. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Hadiya V, Popat K, Vyas S, Varjani S, Vithanage M, Gupta VK, et al. Biochar production with amelioration of microwave-assisted pyrolysis: current scenario, drawbacks and perspectives. Bioresour Technol. 2022;355:127303. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Antunes E, Jacob MV, Brodie G, Schneider PA. Microwave pyrolysis of sewage biosolids: dielectric properties, microwave susceptor role and its impact on biochar properties. J Anal Appl Pyrol. 2018;129:93–100. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Hale SE, Alling V, Martinsen V, Mulder J, Breedveld GD, Cornelissen G. The sorption and desorption of phosphate-P, ammonium-N and nitrate-N in cacao shell and corn cob biochars. Chemosphere. 2013;91(11):1612–9. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mohamed BA, Kim CS, Ellis N, Bi X. Microwave-assisted catalytic pyrolysis of switchgrass for improving bio-oil and biochar properties. Biores Technol. 2016;201:121–32. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Ethaib S, Omar R, Kamal SMM, Awang Biak DR, Zubaidi SL. Microwave-assisted pyrolysis of biomass waste: a mini review. Processes. 2020;8(9):1190. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Salema AA, Yeow YK, Ishaque K, Ani FN, Afzal MT, Hassan A. Dielectric properties and microwave heating of oil palm biomass and biochar. Ind Crops Prod. 2013;50:366–74. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xu G, Zhang Y, Shao H, Sun J. Pyrolysis temperature affects phosphorus transformation in biochar: chemical fractionation and 31 P NMR analysis. Sci Total Environ. 2016;569:65–72. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Bolan S, Sharma S, Mukherjee S, Kumar M, Rao CS, Nataraj KC, et al. Biochar modulating soil biological health: a review. Sci Total Environ. 2024;914:169585. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gupta S, Mondal P, Borugadda VB, Dalai AK. Advances in upgradation of pyrolysis bio-oil and biochar towards improvement in bio-refinery economics: a comprehensive review. Environ Technol Innov. 2021;21:101276. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Selvarajoo A, Wong YL, Khoo KS, Chen WH, Show PL. Biochar production via pyrolysis of citrus peel fruit waste as a potential usage as solid biofuel. Chemosphere. 2022;294:133671. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Patel MR, Panwar NL. Biochar from agricultural crop residues: environmental, production, and life cycle assessment overview. Resour Conserv Recycl Adv. 2023;19:200173. 
 Google Scholar 
 Han L, Sun H, Sun K, Yang Y, Fang L, Xing B. Effect of Fe and Al ions on the production of biochar from agricultural biomass: properties, stability and adsorption efficiency of biochar. Renew Sustain Energy Rev. 2021;145:111133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111133 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Malik S, Laura JS. Evaluating biochar properties derived from various agro-residues via pyrolysis: a comparative study. Orient J Chem. 2025;41(1):120–6. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sharma A, Suthar S. Co-pyrolysis of wheat straw, bentonite and NPK for developing slow-release fertilizer: synergetic effect of blending ratio and pyrolysis temperature on nutrient release dynamics. Sci Total Environ. 2025;1000:180394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.180394 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Syguła E, Piasecka K, Łyczko J, Białowiec A. The potential of decision tree application in threshold analysis of hazardous volatile organic compound release from biochar: implications for environmental risk assessment. Sci Total Environ. 2025;998:180252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2025.180252 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Panagos P, van Liedekerke M, Yigini Y, Montanarella L. Contaminated sites in Europe: review of the current situation based on data collected through a European network. J Environ Public Health. 2013;1:158764. 
 Google Scholar 
 Campos P, Miller AZ, Prats SA, Knicker H, Hagemann N, José M. Biochar amendment increases bacterial diversity and vegetation cover in trace element-polluted soils: a long-term field experiment. Soil Biol Biochem. 2020;150:108014. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Madejón P, Caro-Moreno D, Navarro-Fernández CM, Rossini-Oliva S, Marañón T. Rehabilitation of waste rock piles: impact of acid drainage on potential toxicity by trace elements in plants and soil. J Environ Manag. 2021;280:111848. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Antonangelo JA, Sun X, Zhang H. The roles of co-composted biochar (COMBI) in improving soil quality, crop productivity, and toxic metal amelioration. J Environ Manag. 2021;277:111443. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Burrell LD, Zehetner F, Rampazzo N, Wimmer B, Soja G. Long-term effects of biochar on soil physical properties. Geoderma. 2016;282:96–102. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Agegnehu G, Bass AM, Nelson PN, Bird MI. Benefits of biochar, compost and biochar–compost for soil quality, maize yield and greenhouse gas emissions in a tropical agricultural soil. Sci Total Environ. 2016;543:295–306. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Brtnicky M, Datta R, Holatko J, Bielska L, Gusiatin ZM, Kucerik J, et al. A critical review of the possible adverse effects of biochar in the soil environment. Sci Total Environ. 2021;796:148756. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Webber CL III, White PM Jr, Spaunhorst DJ, Lima IM, Petrie EC. Sugarcane biochar as an amendment for greenhouse growing media for the production of cucurbit seedlings. J Agric Sci. 2018;10(2):104. 
 Google Scholar 
 Furtado GDF, Chaves LHG, de Sousa JRM, Arriel NHC, Xavier DA, de Lima GS. Soil chemical properties, growth and production of sunflower under fertilization with biochar and NPK. Aust J Crop Sci. 2016;10(3):418–24. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rajkovich S, Enders A, Hanley K, Hyland C, Zimmerman AR, Lehmann J. Corn growth and nitrogen nutrition after additions of biochars with varying properties to a temperate soil. Biol Fertil Soils. 2012;48:271–84. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Regmi A, Singh S, Moustaid-Moussa N, Coldren C, Simpson C. The negative effects of high rates of biochar on violas can be counteracted with fertilizer. Plants. 2022;11(4):491. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Patel MR, Panwar NL. Evaluating the agronomic and economic viability of biochar in sustainable crop production. Biomass Bioenergy. 2024;188:107328. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Wang J, Xiong Z, Kuzyakov Y. Biochar stability in soil: meta-analysis of decomposition and priming effects. GCB Bioenergy. 2016;8(3):512–23. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rasa K, Heikkinen J, Hannula M, Arstila K, Kulju S, Hyväluoma J. How and why does willow biochar increase a clay soil water retention capacity? Biomass Bioenergy. 2018;119:346–53. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhang K, Maltais-Landry G, Liao H-L. How soil biota regulate C cycling and soil C pools in diversified crop rotations. Soil Biol Biochem. 2021;156:108219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2021.108219 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhang Y, Wang J, Feng Y. The effects of biochar addition on soil physicochemical properties: a review. CATENA. 2021;202:105284. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhang Y, Zhang Z, Chen Y. Biochar mitigates N 2 O emission of microbial denitrification through modulating carbon metabolism and allocation of reducing power. Environ Sci Technol. 2021;55(12):8068–78. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c01976 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Verheijen FG, Zhuravel A, Silva FC, Amaro A, Ben-Hur M, Keizer JJ. The influence of biochar particle size and concentration on bulk density and maximum water holding capacity of sandy vs sandy loam soil in a column experiment. Geoderma. 2019;347:194–202. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhang J, Qun CHEN, Changfu YOU. Biochar effect on water evaporation and hydraulic conductivity in sandy soil. Pedosphere. 2016;26(2):265–72. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Garbuz S, Mackay A, Camps-Arbestain M, DeVantier B, Minor M. Biochar amendment improves soil physico-chemical properties and alters root biomass and the soil food web in grazed pastures. Agric Ecosyst Environ. 2021;319:107517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2021.107517 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Oyeyiola YB, Ogunlaran LA. Soil acidity ameliorative potentials of biochar from sawdust and Tithonia diversifolia feedstock. Trends Agric Sci. 2023;2(3):298–309. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Singh A, Singh AP, Purakayastha TJ. Characterization of biochar and their influence on microbial activities and potassium availability in an acid soil. Arch Agron Soil Sci. 2019;65(9):1302–15. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Babu S, Mohapatra KP, Das A, Yadav GS, Tahasildar M, Singh R, et al. Designing energy-efficient, economically sustainable and environmentally safe cropping system for the rainfed maize–fallow land of the Eastern Himalayas. Sci Total Environ. 2020;722:137874. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mohan D, Abhishek K, Sarswat A, Patel M, Singh P, Pittman CU. Biochar production and applications in soil fertility and carbon sequestration—a sustainable solution to crop-residue burning in India. RSC Adv. 2018;8(1):508–20. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Chan KY, Van Zwieten L, Meszaros I, Downie A, Joseph S. Agronomic values of greenwaste biochar as a soil amendment. Soil Res. 2007;45(8):629–34. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Premalatha RP, Poorna Bindu J, Nivetha E, Malarvizhi P, Manorama K, Parameswari E, et al. A review on biochar’s effect on soil properties and crop growth. Front Energy Res. 2023;11:1092637. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2023.1092637 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tang H, Hu J, Li B, Liu Y, Tong WK, Yue MR, et al. Degradation-resistant biochar improves soil organic carbon storage: promoting autotrophic metabolism and increasing refractory organic carbon. Bioresour Technol. 2025;428:132452. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2025.132452 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mason ARG, Salomon MJ, Lowe AJ, Cavagnaro TR. Microbial solutions to soil carbon sequestration. J Clean Prod. 2023;417:137993. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137993 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Meng L, Cheng Z, Li S. Response of soil nitrogen-cycling genes to the coupling effects of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi inoculation and biochar application in maize rhizosphere. Sustainability. 2024;16:3349. https://doi.org/10.3390/su16083349 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Meng X, Zheng E, Hou D, Qin M, Meng F, Chen P, et al. The effect of biochar types on carbon cycles in farmland soils: a meta analysis. Sci Total Environ. 2024;930:172623. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172623 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Smith P. Soil carbon sequestration and biochar as negative emission technologies. Glob Chang Biol. 2016;22(3):1315–24. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Lehmann J, Rillig MC, Thies J, Masiello CA, Hockaday WC, Crowley D. Biochar effects on soil biota—a review. Soil Biol Biochem. 2011;43(9):1812–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2011.04.022 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 El-Naggar A, Awad YM, Tang XY, Liu C, Niazi NK, Jien SH, et al. Biochar influences soil carbon pools and facilitates interactions with soil: a field investigation. Land Degrad Dev. 2018;29(7):2162–71. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Alkharabsheh HM, Seleiman MF, Battaglia ML, Shami A, Jalal RS, Alhammad BA, et al. Biochar and its broad impacts in soil quality and fertility, nutrient leaching and crop productivity: a review. Agronomy. 2021;11(5):993. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Al-Wabel MI, Hussain Q, Usman AR, Ahmad M, Abduljabbar A, Sallam AS, et al. Impact of biochar properties on soil conditions and agricultural sustainability: a review. Land Degrad Dev. 2018;29(7):2124–61. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Yrjälä K, Ramakrishnan M, Salo E. Agricultural waste streams as resource in circular economy for biochar production towards carbon neutrality. Curr Opin Environ Sci Health. 2022;26:100339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coesh.2022.100339 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rehman A, Nawaz S, Alghamdi HA, Alrumman S, Yan W, Nawaz MZ. Effects of manure-based biochar on uptake of nutrients and water holding capacity of different types of soils. Case Stud Chem Environ Eng. 2020;2:100036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscee.2020.100036 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Majumder S, Neogi S, Dutta T, Powel MA, Banik P. The impact of biochar on soil carbon sequestration: meta-analytical approach to evaluating environmental and economic advantages. J Environ Manag. 2019;250:109466. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109466 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Tang H, Hu J, Liu Y, Li B, Wang J, Tong WK, et al. Enhancing soil carbon sequestration capacity: synergistic effect of low-release biochar and autotrophic microbial agents over one year. J Environ Chem Eng. 2025;13(5):119092. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2025.119092 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li J, Peduruhewa JH, Brown RW, Chadwick DR, Griffiths RI, Fu H, et al. Biochar reshapes soil bacterial community composition and survival strategies: a meta-analysis revealing trade-offs between microbial stability and functional complexity. Biol Fertil Soils. 2026;62:251–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00374-025-01971-9 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Mangmang GOU, Zhongyi QU, Fan W, Min GXH. Progress in research on biochar affecting soil-water environment and carbon sequestration-mitigating emissions in agricultural fields. Nongye Jixie Xuebao Trans Chin Soc Agric Mach, 2018;49(7). Dahiya A, Kumar R, Sindhu SS. Microbial endophytes mediated phosphorus solubilization: sustainable approach to improve soil fertility and plant growth. In: Maheshwari DK, Dheeman S, editors. Endophytes: mineral nutrient, volume 3, sustainable development and biodiversity 26. Switzerland: Springer Nature; 2021. p. 35–75. Chapter 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Huang K, Li M, Li R, Rasul F, Shahzad S, Wu C, et al. Soil acidification and salinity: the importance of biochar application to agricultural soils. Front Plant Sci. 2023;14:1206820. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Huang K, Zhang J, Tang G, Bao D, Wang T, Kong D. Impacts and mechanisms of biochar on soil microorganisms. Plant Soil Environ. 2023;69(2):45–54. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Chen H, Du X, Lai M, Nazhafati M, Li C, Qi W. Biochar improves sustainability of green roofs via regulate of soil microbial communities. Agriculture. 2021;11(7):620. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Rao S, Lu Y, Huang F, Cai Y, Cai K. A review of researches on effects of biochars on soil microorganisms. J Ecol Rural Environ. 2016;32(1):53–9. CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sindhu SS, Goyal S, Malik DK. Soil flora and their significance. In: Rana MK, editor. Modern concepts of vegetable production. Daryaganj, New Delhi: Biotech Books; 2012. p. 386–429. 
 Google Scholar 
 Mengmeng W, Qixing Z. Environmental effects and their mechanisms of biochar applied to soils. Environ Chem. 2013;32(5):768–80. 
 Google Scholar 
 Wong JW, Ogbonnaya UO. Biochar porosity: a nature-based dependent parameter to deliver microorganisms to soils for land restoration. Environ Sci Pollut Res. 2021;28:46894–909. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Xiang L, Liu S, Ye S, Yang H, Song B, Qin F, et al. Potential hazards of biochar: the negative environmental impacts of biochar applications. J Hazard Mater. 2021;420:126611. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zhu X, Chen B, Zhu L, Xing B. Effects and mechanisms of biochar-microbe interactions in soil improvement and pollution remediation: a review. Environ Pollut. 2017;227:98–115. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Blanco-Canqui H. Biochar and soil physical properties. Soil Sci Soc Am J. 2017;81(4):687–711. Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Zheng J, Chen J, Pan G, Liu X, Zhang X, Li L, et al. Biochar decreased microbial metabolic quotient and shifted community composition four years after a single incorporation in a slightly acid rice paddy from southwest China. Sci Total Environ. 2016;571:206–17. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Song Y, Yuan G, Wu Q, Situ G, Liang C, Qin H, et al. Change in microbial metabolic quotient under biochar amendment was associated with soil organic carbon quality, microbial community composition, and enzyme activity in bulk and rhizosphere soils in an acid rice paddy. J Soil Sci Plant Nutr. 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42729-023-01363-8 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sindhu SS, Dadarwal KR. Molecular biology of nodule development and nitrogen fixation in Rhizobium- legume symbiosis. In: Srivastava HS, Singh RP, editors. Nitrogen nutrition in higher plants. New Delhi: Associated Publishing Company; 1995. p. 57–129. 
 Google Scholar 
 Dupont CA, Jordier N, Bizière-Maco H, Barbey C, Latour X, Merieau A. Volatile compounds as bacterial communication signals: state of art, limitations and future perspectives. Microbiol Res. 2026;307:128478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2026.128478 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Phour M, Sehrawat A, Sindhu SS, Glick BR. Interkingdom signaling in plant-rhizomicrobiome interactions for sustainable agriculture. Microbiol Res. 2020;241:126589. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micres.2020.126589 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Gao X, Cheng HY, Del Valle I, Liu S, Masiello CA, Silberg JJ. Charcoal disrupts soil microbial communication through a combination of signal sorption and hydrolysis. ACS Omega. 2016;1(2):226–33. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Masiello CA, Chen Y, Gao X, Liu S, Cheng HY, Bennett MR, et al. Biochar and microbial signaling: production conditions determine effects on microbial communication. Environ Sci Technol. 2013;47(20):11496–503. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Li Y, Fan C, Liu L, Zhai X, Zang B, Li Y-Y, et al. Biochar-induced quorum sensing enhances methane production by strengthening direct interspecies electron transfer. Bioresour Technol. 2025;434:132845. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2025.132845 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Raza A, Razzaq A, Mehmood SS, Zou X, Zhang X, Lv Y, et al. Impact of climate change on crops adaptation and strategies to tackle its outcome: a review. Plants. 2019;8(2):34. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sehrawat A, Khandelwal A, Sindhu SS. Characterization of Mesorhizobium strains for salt tolerance and wilt control: their potential for plant growth promotion of chickpea ( Cicer arietinum L.). Legume Res. 2020;43(1):146–50. 
 Google Scholar 
 Chaudhary S, Sindhu SS. Microbiome-mediated remediation of heavy metals: impact on soil health, crop production, and ecosystem sustainability. In: Parray JA, Li W-J, editors. Microbiome-assisted bioremediation: rehabilitating agricultural soils. Academic Press, Elsevier; 2024. p. 257–311. Chapter 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Clair SB, Lynch JP. The opening of Pandora’s box: climate change impacts on soil fertility and crop nutrition in developing countries. Plant Soil. 2010;335:101–15. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Phour M, Sindhu SS. Soil salinity and climate change: microbiome-based strategies for mitigation of salt stress to sustainable agriculture. In: Parray JA, editor. Climate change and microbiome dynamics. Climate change management. Cham: Springer; 2023. p. 191–243. 
 Google Scholar 
 Wu Y, Wang X, Zhang L, Zheng Y, Liu X, Zhang Y. The critical role of biochar to mitigate the adverse impacts of drought and salinity stress in plants. Front Plant Sci. 2023;14:1163451. Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Alsherif EA, Al-Shaikh TM, AbdElgawad H. Heavy metal effects on biodiversity and stress responses of plants inhabiting contaminated soil in Khulais, Saudi Arabia. Biology (Basel). 2022;11:164. https://doi.org/10.3390/biology11020164 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Singh J, Thakur JK. Photosynthesis and abiotic stress in plants. In: Biotic and abiotic stress tolerance in plants, pp 27–46, 2018. Kumar S, Diksha, Sindhu SS, Kumar R. Harnessing phosphate-solubilizing microorganisms for mitigation of nutritional and environmental stresses, and sustainable crop production. Planta. 2025;261:95. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00425-025-04669-2 . Article 
 CAS 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Sindhu SS, Dahiya A, Chahar K. The rhizosphere microbiome and biological control of weeds. Span J Agric Res. 2019;17(4):e10R01. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Savary S, Willocquet L, Pethybridge SJ, Esker P, McRoberts N, Nelson A. The global burden of pathogens and pests on major food crops. Nat Ecol Evol. 2019;3(3):430–9. Article 
 PubMed 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Oshunsanya SO, Nwosu NJ, Li Y. Abiotic stress in agricultural crops under climatic conditions. In: Sustainable agriculture, forest and environmental management, pp 71–100, 2019. Ahluwalia O, Singh PC, Bhatia R. A review on drought stress in plants: implications, mitigation and the role of plant growth promoting rhizobacteria. Resour Environ Sustain. 2021;5:100032. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resenv.2021.100032 . Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Anuradha GRK, Sindhu SS. Responses of strawberry ( Fragaria x Ananassa Duch.) to PGPR inoculation. Bangladesh J Bot. 2020;49(4):1071–6. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Dastogeer KMG, Zahan MI, Rhaman MS, Sarker MSA, Chakraborty A. Microbe-mediated thermotolerance in plants and pertinent mechanisms—a meta-analysis and review. Front Microbiol. 2022;13:833566. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.833566 . Article 
 PubMed 
 PubMed Central 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Vocciante M, Grifoni M, Fusini D, Petruzzelli G, Franchi E. The role of plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) in mitigating plant’s environmental stresses. Appl Sci (Basel). 2022;12:1231. https://doi.org/10.3390/app12031231 . Article 
 CAS 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Akhtar SS, Li G, Andersen MN, Liu F. Biochar enhances yield and quality of tomato under reduced irrigation. Agric Water Manag. 2014;138:37–44. Article 
 
 Google Scholar 
 Abhi