Vol.:(0123456789)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-026-38218-5
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Mitigation of micropollutant toxicity in treated wastewater using 
the  H2O2/S2O8
2−/UVC process: An ecotoxicological perspective 
for agricultural reuse
Lucas Gustavo da Costa1 · Gabrielly Machado dos Santos1 · Eduardo Oliveira Marson1 · 
Maria Gabriela Franco de Lima2 · Meliza Arantes de Souza Bessa3 · Guilherme Scarafiz4 · 
Sidney Fernandes Sales Junior5 · Enrico Mendes Saggioro5 · Solidônio Rodrigues de Carvalho4 · 
Adão de Siqueira Ferreira3 · Jeamylle Nilin2 · Waldomiro Borges Neto1 · Alam Gustavo Trovó1 
Received: 26 February 2026 / Accepted: 3 September 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
Advanced oxidation processes can efficiently degrade organic micropollutants in wastewater. However, chemical assessment 
alone does not ensure that treated effluents are biologically compatible for reuse, as residual contaminants and transforma-
tion products may have toxic effects. Thus, this study evaluated the efficiency of the previously optimized H2O2/S2O8
2‒/
UVC process for mitigating the ecotoxicological effects of municipal wastewater enriched with colchicine, nitazoxanide, 
and sulfamethoxazole, considering its potential application for agricultural reuse. The approach was based on multiple eco-
toxicological parameters at different biological levels: oxidative stress in Eisenia andrei, phytotoxicity in Lactuca sativa, 
cytotoxicity and genotoxicity in Allium cepa, and growth inhibition of environmentally relevant microorganisms (Azospiril-
lum brasilense and Saccharomyces cerevisiae). The microcontaminant-enriched effluent exhibited substantial genotoxicity 
(21%) and severe phytotoxicity, highlighting the risks of reusing effluent without advanced treatment. The H2O2/S2O8
2‒/
UVC process significantly reduced residual toxicity, lowering genotoxicity to 6% and increasing the plant growth index to 
values above 80%. This process did not induce cytotoxic effects or adversely affect beneficial microorganisms. These results 
suggest that the process can reduce the toxicity and biological impacts of microcontaminants, which could mitigate the 
ecotoxicological risks of wastewater intended for non-potable reuse, including in agriculture.
Graphical Abstract
Keywords Advanced oxidation process · Biocompatibility · Ecotoxicity · Peroxides · Sewage treatment plant · Soil toxicity
Responsible Editor: Gangrong Shi
Extended author information available on the last page of the article
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Introduction
The increasing demand for water resources, driven by 
population growth and the intensification of industrial and 
urban activities, is associated with the generation of large 
volumes of liquid effluents with contamination potential 
(Bilgiç and Baba 2023). Traditional methods of treating 
sanitary effluents were not designed to remove recalcitrant 
organic microcontaminants. However, the use of advanced 
oxidation processes (AOPs) is highlighted as an effective 
complementary technique for the treatment of wastewater 
containing these substances. AOPs are based on the gen-
eration of free radicals, which are highly reactive species 
capable of degrading microcontaminants (Marson et al. 
2022). However, the chemical effectiveness of AOPs does 
not, on its own, ensure the environmental safety of treated 
wastewater. This is because the formation of transforma-
tion products (TPs) during the process can result in com-
plex mixtures with varying degrees of toxicity. TPs formed 
during treatment processes can persist in the environment 
and contribute significantly to ecological risks. Therefore, 
in addition to physicochemical analysis, toxicity assess-
ment of treated effluents is essential for understanding 
potential environmental harms (Gonçalves et al. 2023).
Contaminant degradation pathways vary according to the 
type of wastewater treatment process, making it impractical 
to individually test all relevant compounds using conven-
tional toxicity assays across multiple trophic levels, espe -
cially since many of these substances are not commercially 
available. The isolation and identification of individual TPs is 
labor-intensive, so a pragmatic way to detect potential harm-
ful effects of degradation processes is to evaluate the toxicity 
of mixtures containing the combined TPs. The “effect-driven 
approach” centers on the ecotoxicological testing of reaction 
mixtures, enabling the prioritization and risk evaluation of 
TPs, without their prior identification (Araujo et al. 2024).
Integrated assessments at the molecular, biochemi-
cal, and organism levels are essential for understanding 
the residual toxicity of treated effluents and ensuring 
that they can be safely released into the environment or 
be reused for non-potable purposes. Among the various 
reuse options, the application of treated wastewater in 
agriculture has attracted increasing attention, especially 
in regions of water scarcity. Controlled and safe reuse can 
significantly contribute to agricultural sustainability by 
contributing to nutrient recycling and reducing pressure 
on natural resources. This practice can also mitigate envi-
ronmental impacts associated with discharges of waste-
waters into water bodies, including eutrophication and the 
degradation of water quality (Younas and Younas 2022).
There is an increasing demand for technologies capable of 
degrading persistent organic compounds and enabling the safe 
reuse of effluents released from wastewater treatment plants 
(WWTPs), which has led to the proposal of strategies that 
combine multiple oxidants and activation sources. Recent 
studies have shown that the integrated use of hydrogen per-
oxide (H2O2), persulfate (S2O8
2−), and UVC radiation can 
significantly increase oxidative efficiency against emerging 
contaminants of concern, such as colchicine (COL), nitazoxa-
nide (NTZ), and sulfamethoxazole (SMX) (Costa et al. 2025).
The advantage of this hybrid system is that it enables 
the simultaneous generation of hydroxyl (HO•) and sul-
fate (SO4
•−) radicals, resulting in performance superior to 
that obtained using these oxidants or peroxymonosulfate 
 (HSO5⁻) individually. Additional limitations associated 
with the use of HSO5⁻ are its higher cost and greater energy 
demand for activation (Wacławek et al. 2017), reinforcing 
the potential of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC route as a more viable 
option. Another relevant aspect is its low susceptibility to 
interference from inorganic species present in real effluents, 
which contributes to maintaining operational efficiency and 
makes the process an economically attractive option for use 
at wastewater treatment plants (Costa et al. 2025).
In the European Union, the Proposal for a European Direc-
tive COM (2022)541 establishes minimum criteria for the safe 
reuse of treated effluents (European Union 2022), including the 
removal of at least 80% of specific organic micropollutants and 
providing microbiological control, particularly for agricultural 
applications. However, the regulation does not address assess-
ment of the eco-compatibility of treated effluents, which is 
essential to ensure that effluent reuse does not present envi-
ronmental risks due to the presence of residual contaminants.
Therefore, the purpose of the present study was to inves-
tigate whether the chemical degradation of micropollutants 
through advanced oxidation processes effectively reduces the 
biological effects of treated wastewater, particularly for agri-
cultural reuse. To this end, effluent samples from a WWTP 
enriched with COL, NTZ, and SMX, each at concentration 
325 nmol L⁻1, were analyzed before and after treatment with 
the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process. Multiple bioassays (oxida-
tive stress, phytotoxicity, cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, and 
microbial growth inhibition) were integrated to improve the 
understanding of the molecular, biochemical, and cellular 
effects associated with micropollutant degradation. The 
novelty of this study does not lie in applying or optimizing 
the advanced process, which has been addressed previously, 
but rather in determining whether its demonstrated chemical 
performance is accompanied by reduced biological effects at 
different levels of biological organization and trophic com-
partments. These integrated assays are crucial for environ-
mental risk assessment and ensuring the safe, sustainable 
reuse of treated wastewater. They provide a broader ecotoxi-
cological perspective that is rarely incorporated into studies 
of advanced wastewater treatment processes.
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Materials and methods
Details regarding chemical reagents (Experimental Pro-
cedure S1), HPLC–DAD analytical methods for the target 
compounds (Experimental Procedure S2), and a flowchart 
of the experimental protocol (Fig. S1) are provided in the 
Supplementary Information.
WWTP effluent sampling
Effluent sampling was performed at a wastewater treatment 
plant located in the city of Uberlândia, Minas Gerais State, 
Brazil (18° 55′ 08″ S, 48° 16′ 37″ W), during the fall of 
2023. The treatment stages employed at this plant were 
as follows: preliminary (bar screens + desanders); primary 
and secondary up-flow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) 
treatments; and tertiary treatment (coagulation-flocculation 
with ferric chloride (FeCl3) and flotation). Samples were 
collected after the last stage of wastewater treatment (at the 
flotation channel outlet). Physicochemical characterization 
of the municipal wastewater was performed immediately 
after sampling (Table S1, Supplementary Information). 
The wastewater was stored in plastic containers and kept 
refrigerated at 4 °C during the experiments.
Degradation tests
The experimental apparatus consisted of two UVC mercury 
vapor lamps (8 W, maximum emission at 254 nm), which 
were placed 3.5 cm apart and 1 cm above an amber glass 
reactor (4.3 cm height × 15.5 cm diameter, surface area of 
188.7 cm2). UVC irradiance (4.9 W m⁻ 2) was measured in 
the range 250–400 nm, using a radiometer (MU-100, Apo-
gee Instruments) positioned at a distance of 1 cm from the 
lamps, at the same angle of incidence.
The laboratory-scale photodegradation experiments 
were performed by irradiating 500 mL of WWTP effluent 
containing 325 nmol L ⁻1 of each target compound (COL: 
130 µg L⁻ 1; NTZ: 100 µg L⁻ 1; SMX: 82 µg L⁻ 1), under 
magnetic stirring (Costa et al. 2025). This concentration 
was chosen because it was sufficiently high to allow analy -
sis by HPLC–DAD without preconcentration, while also 
being low enough to be representative of levels found in 
real environmental samples (Trovó et al. 2024).
H2O2 and S2O8
2− concentrations (Tables S2 and S3, Sup-
plementary Information) were optimized in previous work 
using multivariate mixture design and rotatable central 
composite design experiments. This study also considered 
physicochemical performance, matrix effects, and chemical 
degradation behavior (Costa et al. 2025). Thus, the present 
study was designed to evaluate the biological responses of 
wastewater after treatment.
All the assays were performed at the natural pH of the 
WWTP effluent (pH = 6.4 ± 0.2) and room temperature 
(~ 22 °C).
Bioassays
Potential ecotoxicological effects were investigated by 
exposing the test organisms to the following media: aqueous 
solutions of the target compounds at 325 nmol L⁻1, individu-
ally and in combination (MIXaq); effluent from a WWTP; 
WWTP effluent enriched with a mixture of the target com-
pounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP subjected to treatment 
times corresponding to 80% (10 min; in accordance with 
Directive COM(2022)541 (European Union 2022)) and 
94% (20 min; limit of quantification) degradation of these 
compounds. In all the tests, any residual oxidants (H2O2 
and S2O8
2–) were neutralized using sodium thiosulfate as a 
reducing agent.
Oxidative stress
Assays were performed using Eisenia andrei earthworms 
raised in bovine manure, under controlled conditions 
(25  °C ± 2  °C), in accordance with the ASTM E1567 
(2012) standard (American Society for Testing & Materials 
2012). The sensitivity of the earthworm batch was previ-
ously assessed by an acute contact test with chloroaceta-
mide, used as a positive control (PC) (Organisation for Eco-
nomic Co-operation and Development 1984), obtaining a 
lethal concentration for 50% of the individuals (LC50) of 
5.15 µg cm⁻2 ± 0.28 µg cm⁻2.
The earthworms selected were adults (2 to 6 months 
old) with well-developed clitellum and body mass between 
300 and 600 mg. Groups of 15 individuals were placed in 
beakers and exposed to 1 mL volumes of the test solutions 
and distilled water (negative control, NC). The containers 
were kept horizontally in the dark for 72 h, at 20 °C ± 2 °C. 
After exposure, the surviving individuals were individually 
homogenized in 2 mL of Lumbricus-specific buffered saline 
solution (71 mmol L⁻1 NaCl, 4.70 mmol L⁻1 KCl, 1.09 mmol 
L⁻1 MgSO4·7H2O, 0.39 mmol L⁻1 KH2PO4, 0.56 mmol L⁻1 
 Na2HPO4, and 4.20 mmol L⁻1 NaHCO3) at 1000 rpm for 60 s 
(Sales Jr. et al. 2021). The homogenates were centrifuged 
(885 × g, 5 min) and the supernatants (lysates) were stored 
at − 80 °C for subsequent lipid peroxidation and protein car-
bonylation analyses.
Lipid peroxidation was quantified by measuring malondi-
aldehyde (MDA), according to a method adapted from Ester-
bauer and Cheeseman (1990). For this, a 150 µL volume of 
lysate (diluted 5 × in ultrapure water) was mixed with 150 µL 
of trichloroacetic acid (10%) and 1200 µL of 2-thiobarbituric 
acid (0.53% in a solution of 20% acetic acid + 0.7 mol L⁻ 1 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
NaOH). The mixture was incubated at 100 °C for 60 min, 
cooled in an ice bath for 10 min, and centrifuged at 1600 × g 
for 10 min. Aliquots of 300 µL of the supernatant were trans-
ferred to microplates and absorbance measurements were 
performed at 535 nm.
Protein carbonylation was determined by reaction with 
2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH). In this procedure, 150 
µL aliquots of lysate (diluted 5 ×) were incubated with 80 
µL volumes of DNPH (10 mmol L⁻1 in 0.5 mol L⁻1 H3PO4) 
for 10 min, at room temperature, followed by addition of 40 
µL volumes of NaOH (6 mol L⁻ 1), incubation for a further 
10 min, and measurement of absorbance at 450 nm (Mes-
quita et al. 2014). The total protein content was quantified 
using a modification of the method of Lowry et al. (1951), 
employing bovine serum albumin standard solutions and 
measurement at 595 nm.
Phytotoxicity
Assays were performed by exposing 10 seeds of lettuce 
(Lactuca sativa, variety Grand Rapids TBR) in a Petri dish, 
in triplicate (n = 30 per treatment). The seeds were arranged 
evenly on filter papers and moistened with 5 mL of each test 
sample. Distilled water was used as a negative control (NC). 
The plates were kept in an incubator (BOD type) for 7 days, 
in the dark, at a controlled temperature of 20 °C ± 2 °C. The 
germination percentage was then obtained and the average 
length of the developed rootlets was determined (Sousa et al. 
2022).
Phytotoxicity was assessed using the growth index (GI), 
according to Eq. (1 ), where GSS is the number of ger -
minated seeds for the test sample, GSC is the number of 
germinated seeds for the control, RLS is the average length 
(cm) of the rootlets for the test sample, and RLC is the 
average length (cm) of the rootlets for the control (Priac 
et al. 2017).
Cytotoxicity and genotoxicity
For this test, 20 onion (Allium cepa) seeds were placed on 
filter papers in Petri dishes, followed by exposure to 4 mL 
volumes of the test solutions. The negative control (NC) for 
both parameters was deionized water, while methyl meth-
anesulfonate (MMS) was used as a positive control (PC) 
for the genotoxicity assay. The seeds were kept in an incu-
bator (BOD type) for 7 days, in the dark, at 22 °C ± 2 °C. 
After germination, the rootlets were collected and fixed in 
Carnoy’s solution (ethanol:acetic acid, 3:1 v v⁻ 1) for 24 h, 
at room temperature. The rootlets were then transferred to 
freshly prepared Carnoy’s solution and stored at 4 °C, until 
(1)GI =
/parenleft.s2GSS
GSC
/parenright.s2/parenleft.s2RLS
RLC
/parenright.s2
100
used in the preparation of slides for microscopy analysis 
(Fiskesjö 1985; Rank and Nielsen 1997).
To prepare the slides, the rootlets were washed three 
times with distilled water (5 min each wash), subjected to 
acid hydrolysis with HCl (5 mol L⁻1) for 8 min, and washed 
again. Sections of the meristematic regions were placed on 
glass slides, a drop of 2% v v⁻1 acetic carmine was added to 
each slide, coverslips were placed over the samples, and a 
wooden stick was used to gently macerate the sections. The 
samples were then frozen in liquid nitrogen. Subsequently, 
the coverslips were removed for drying and the slides were 
stained with Giemsa solution (1:9 v v⁻1 in deionized water) 
for 20 min, dried at room temperature, and stored prior 
to analysis by light microscopy (magnification of 400 ×) 
(Fiskesjö 1985; Rank and Nielsen 1997). Four slides were 
prepared for each sample, with analysis of 1250 cells on each 
slide (total of 5000 cells per sample). Recording was made 
of the mitotic phases and cell abnormalities. The cytotoxic 
effects of the samples were determined by calculation of 
the mitotic index (MI), according to Eq. (2 ). The frequen-
cies of chromosomal aberrations (CA) and nuclear aber -
rations (NA), considered to be indicators of genotoxicity 
(Fiskesjö, 1985; Rank and Nielsen 1997), were determined 
using Eq. (3).
Inhibition of microbial growth
The potential inhibition of microbial growth was evaluated 
using Azospirillum brasilense (AbV-6) and Saccharomy -
ces cerevisiae as test organisms, according to the method 
of Vazquez et al. (2021), with adaptations. For this, 5 mL 
volumes of culture medium (1.0 g L⁻ 1 glucose, 5.0 g L⁻ 1 
 NH4H2PO4, 1.0 g L⁻ 1 K2HPO4, 1.0 g L⁻ 1 NaCl, 0.2 g L⁻ 1 
 MgSO4·7H2O, and 0.5 g L ⁻1 yeast extract) were placed in 
Falcon tubes and mixed with 5 mL volumes of the test solu-
tions. Distilled water was used for the NC.
Additions were then made of 100 µL volumes of the pre-
viously prepared microbial cultures, with adjustment of the 
optical density (OD) to provide concentrations of 3.1 × 106 
cells mL⁻1 for A. brasilense and 1.2 × 107 cells mL⁻1 for S. cer-
evisiae. The cell concentrations were determined by counting 
colony-forming units (CFUs). The samples were then incu-
bated in an orbital shaker-type incubator at 30 °C ± 2 °C and 
180 rpm. After the incubation period, the OD was determined 
by UV–visible spectrophotometry, with measurement of the 
absorbance at 600 nm (Vazquez et al. 2021).
(2)MI = 100
/parenleft.s3Dividing cells
5000
/parenright.s3
(3)CA or NA = 100
/parenleft.s2Altered cells
5000
/parenright.s2
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using the biologi-
cal replicates described for each bioassay. The data are 
presented as mean ± standard deviation. Differences 
between treatments were assessed using the nonparametric 
Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by the Dunn post-hoc test for 
multiple comparisons. Statistical significance considered a 
95% confidence level (p ≤ 0.05).
In the figures, treatments that share the same letter are 
not significantly different, while treatments with different 
letters are significantly different, according to Dunn’s test. 
All these analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 
versions 8.0.2 and 9.3.0.
Results and discussion
Oxidative stress
The lipid peroxidation (LPO) results, expressed by the 
concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA), revealed sig-
nificant differences (p ≤ 0.05) in the oxidative responses of 
E. andrei to the samples (Fig.  1). The MDA levels for the 
COL and NC treatments were similar, suggesting that at 
the COL concentration employed (325 nmol L⁻ 1 or 130 μg 
L⁻1), this compound had low potential to induce oxidative 
stress.
The exposures to NTZ and SMX significantly increased 
MDA levels by 37.2% ± 0.1% and 23.5% ± 0.2%, respec-
tively, compared to NC, indicating that these compounds had 
greater potential to cause oxidative damage to lipid biomol-
ecules. The exposure to MIXaq resulted in a 38.0% ± 0.2% 
increase of MDA, suggesting additive or synergistic effects 
of the compounds. The simultaneous exposure to a combina-
tion of compounds may increase cellular stress, due to the 
overlapping of toxic mechanisms including the generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial disturbances, 
and inflammation (Kümmerer 2009).
Therefore, exposure of the earthworms to NTZ, SMX, 
and MIXaq could lead to excessive production and accu-
mulation of ROS, particularly H2O2. If not metabolized by 
catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and other 
peroxidase enzymes, H2O2 can participate in the Fenton 
and Haber–Weiss reactions in the presence of Fe2+ and 
other transition metals such as Cu, Ni, Co, and V, generat-
ing highly reactive HO• radicals that are the main species 
responsible for attacking the lipids in cell membranes, con-
sequently inducing LPO (Ayala et al. 2014). The effects of 
these compounds on the antioxidant systems of living organ-
isms have received little attention in the literature. How -
ever, studies have reported the oxidative effects of SMX in 
Fig. 1 Levels of malondialdehyde (MDA) in E. andrei exposed to the 
following conditions: aqueous solutions of colchicine (COL), nitazox-
anide (NTZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and the mixture of the three 
compounds (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 325 nmol L⁻1; wastewa-
ter treatment plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP enriched with the three 
compounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after treatment for 10  min 
and 20 min. The error bars indicate the standard deviations. The let-
ters above the columns indicate statistical differences relative to the 
negative control (NC): the same letters denote no significant differ -
ence, while different letters indicate a statistical difference (Dunn’s 
test, p ≤ 0.05)
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Dendrobaena veneta (Žaltauskaitė et al. 2025) and Eisenia 
fetida (Zhang et al. 2024). In D. veneta, SMX was shown to 
induce LPO (an effect described as mild) after four and eight 
weeks of exposure to the compound at concentrations from 
1 to 500 mg kg⁻1, except at 50 mg kg⁻1, at which levels were 
lower than for the control group (Žaltauskaitė et al. 2025). 
In E. fetida, exposure to SMX significantly increased MDA 
levels, with pronounced effects (> 100%) observed at most 
time points, except on days 10 and 14 (Zhang et al. 2024).
Exposure to the effluent containing a mixture of the com-
pounds (MIXWWTP) resulted in a 21.0% ± 0.2% reduction 
in lipid peroxidation, compared to the effluent without the 
added compounds (WWTP). This attenuation of toxicity 
could have been related to the complexity of the effluent 
matrix, including the presence of organic or particulate sub-
stances possessing antioxidant activity or adsorption capac-
ity for the target compounds, which reduced the bioavailabil-
ity of the latter, while at the same time modifying the matrix 
composition (Monteiro and Boxall 2010).
Application of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process for times of 
10 and 20 min resulted in low LPO values that approached 
those for NC and MIXWWTP, suggesting that the process did 
not generate significant concentrations of TPs capable of 
causing lipid peroxidation in E. andrei earthworms.
The protein carbonylation (PTC) results, shown in Fig. 2, 
presented a pattern similar to that observed for LPO, with 
NTZ (325 nmol L⁻ 1 or 100 μg L⁻ 1) being the only sub-
stance that led to substantially increased PTC (9.3 μmol g 
L⁻1 ± 0.7  μmol  g L⁻ 1). In contrast, COL (7.3  μmol  g 
L⁻1 ± 0.4 μmol g L⁻1), SMX (7.9 μmol g L⁻ 1 ± 0.7 μmol g 
L⁻1), and MIXaq (7 μmol g L⁻ 1 ± 4 μmol g L⁻1) did not sig-
nificantly alter PTC, indicating lower impacts on protein 
oxidation, under the tested conditions.
NTZ is a synthetic thiazolide drug primarily used to treat 
intestinal infections. Its mechanism of action is not fully 
understood, although it is believed that NTZ inhibits fatty 
acid synthesis, with metabolic and cellular consequences 
that indirectly affect the redox balance of cells (Al-Kuraishy 
et al. 2022). There have been no previous reports of studies 
using earthworms to assess the effects of NTZ on the anti-
oxidant system. However, the effects of this compound have 
been described in Wistar albino rats, where increased ROS 
was evidenced by elevated levels of reduced glutathione 
(GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and CAT (Pal et al. 
2020). Despite the higher ROS levels, there was no observed 
increase of MDA. However, at an NTZ concentration of 
25 mg kg⁻ 1, there was a 1.96-fold increase of protein car -
bonylation, compared to the control.
Protein carbonylation is an irreversible modification 
in which carbonyl groups (of aldehydes or ketones) are 
incorporated into proteins by oxidation or the addition of 
reactive species. The mechanisms include metal-catalyzed 
Fig. 2 Determination of protein carbonylation (PTC) in E. andrei 
exposed to the following conditions: aqueous solutions of colchi-
cine (COL), nitazoxanide (NTZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and the 
mixture of the three compounds (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 
325 nmol L⁻ 1; wastewater treatment plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP 
enriched with the three compounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after 
treatment for 10 min and 20 min. The error bars indicate the standard 
deviations. The letters above the columns indicate statistical differ -
ences, relative to the negative control (NC): the same letters denote 
no significant difference, while different letters indicate a statistical 
difference (Dunn’s test, p ≤ 0.05)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
oxidation and the adduction of reactive carbonyl species 
(RCS) such as MDA, which bind to cysteine, histidine, and 
lysine residues by means of Schiff base reactions (Aka-
gawa 2021). Hence, the increase in lipid peroxidation fol-
lowing NTZ exposure (Fig.  1) suggested the accumulation 
of ROS, enabling Fenton and Haber–Weiss reactions that 
produced HO•. This process led not only to lipid peroxida-
tion, but also to protein carbonylation by metal-catalyzed 
oxidation and the adduction of RCS, such as MDA pro-
duced during lipid peroxidation (Akagawa 2021).
Exposure to the WWTP effluent resulted in a PTC level 
(8.1 μmol g L⁻ 1 ± 0.8 μmol g L⁻1) similar to that obtained 
with the NTZ aqueous solution. However, when the com-
pounds were added to the effluent (MIXWWTP), the abil-
ity to cause oxidative stress decreased (PTC = 7 μmol g 
L⁻1 ± 1 μmol g L⁻ 1). When the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC pro-
cess was applied to the enriched effluent, the PTC level 
obtained after treatment for 10 min was statistically simi-
lar (p ≤ 0.05) to the effect of NTZ (PTC10min = 7.6 μmol g 
L⁻1 ± 0.5 μmol g L⁻ 1). However, at the two tested times, 
no significant changes in PTC were observed, compared 
to NC or MIXWWTP.
Overall, the treatment applied to MIXWWTP resulted in 
an effluent that was less toxic, in terms of lipid peroxida-
tion. However, toxicity related to protein carbonylation 
increased 1.05-fold, compared to the control, indicating 
that the treatment may have generated toxic oxidative 
byproducts. The observed increase in protein carbonyla-
tion, despite the apparent decreases of other oxidative 
damage markers, supported the hypothesis that the TPs 
generated by the applied treatment were able to induce cel-
lular oxidative stress, once again emphasizing the impor -
tance of identifying these TPs in future studies.
The present findings were consistent with the literature 
(Zhang et al. 2020), highlighting that the effectiveness of 
a treatment should not be assessed solely in terms of the 
removal of the parent compound, but should also consider 
the nature and reactivity of the resulting TPs, especially 
their potential to induce specific oxidative effects in dif-
ferent biomolecules. The use of biochemical biomarkers 
to assess sublethal effects provides a more sensitive and 
mechanistic understanding of contaminant impacts on 
organisms, even at environmentally relevant concentra-
tions. Unlike mortality-based endpoints, which reflect 
only the most extreme outcome of exposure, the use of 
biomarkers such as lipid peroxidation and protein carbon-
ylation allows the detection of early cellular disturbances 
that may precede functional or population-level effects.
Phytotoxicity
Phytotoxicity was assessed using the growth index (GI) 
of Lactuca sativa seeds (Fig.  3). This analysis considered 
germination and root growth, which are parameters widely 
used to indicate the potential toxic effects of environmen-
tal contaminants (Sousa et al. 2022; Priac et al. 2017).
The NC (distilled water) showed 100% germination, 
with rootlet lengths ranging from 0.8 to 4.5 cm, confirm-
ing seed viability and appropriate experimental conditions. 
Aqueous solutions of the target compounds (COL, NTZ, 
and SMX), individually and in a mixture (MIXaq), resulted 
in GI values below 80% (dashed line in Fig.  3), indicat-
ing possible phytotoxic effects (Sousa et al. 2022). These 
results suggested that the presence of the microcontami-
nants, even at low concentrations, was sufficient to cause 
physiological stress in the seeds and negatively affect their 
development.
COL is widely used to induce polyploidy in plants, pro-
moting cell growth, biomass accumulation, and photosyn-
thetic efficiency, as well as the production of secondary 
metabolites, at certain doses (Obando-González et al. 2024). 
However, at higher concentrations or after prolonged expo-
sure, COL may inhibit germination and reduce initial growth 
(Verma et al. 2024). SMX has been reported to have several 
toxic effects in plants such as barley and wheat, including 
reduced root growth, decreased chlorophyll and carotenoid 
contents, impaired photosynthetic activity, and increased 
oxidative stress (Yang et al. 2025). Although the toxic effects 
of NTZ in plants have not yet been reported, previous stud-
ies have shown that antibiotics and antiparasitic drugs can 
interfere with plant growth due to genotoxic effects or by 
generating ROS, which could have been a possible cause of 
the effects observed in the present study (Kümmerer 2009).
Exposure of the seeds to the WWTP effluent resulted in 
significant growth inhibition (GI = 47% ± 1%), evidencing 
the presence of bioactive compounds that remained after the 
sewage treatment process and could affect plant metabolism. 
Addition of the target compounds to the effluent (MIXWWTP) 
slightly improved GI (56% ± 2%), as also observed for the 
oxidative stress parameters. However, the values remained 
well below the threshold above which toxicity was consid-
ered absent. Previous work has shown that wastewater efflu-
ents can negatively affect plants, reducing germination rates, 
inhibiting growth, decreasing the chlorophyll content, and 
inducing oxidative stress (Batool et al. 2024).
The decreased inhibition observed for MIXWWTP may 
have been due to interactions between the matrix and the 
target compounds, or the existence of dilution effects. This 
finding emphasized the importance of evaluating contami-
nants of emerging concern in real environmental matrices, 
since the complexity inherent to such media can modify the 
bioavailability, transport, transformation, and, most impor -
tantly, the toxicity of the contaminants, modulating toxic 
effects (Meher and Zarouri 2025).
Application of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process to 
 MIXWWTP resulted in GI values exceeding 80%, indicating 
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
the absence of phytotoxic effects and suggesting that the pro-
cess led to the degradation of organic microcontaminants, 
transforming them into byproducts with lower impacts on 
the germination and growth of Lactuca sativa. Other studies 
have shown that AOPs can be highly effective in degrad-
ing organic microcontaminants including pharmaceuticals, 
pesticides, hormones, and other emerging pollutants (Araujo 
et al. 2024; Costa et al. 2025; Gonçalves et al. 2023).
Cytotoxicity
The mitotic index (MI) parameter is widely employed in 
cytotoxicity studies as a classic indicator of cellular prolif-
eration, reflecting the percentage of actively dividing cells 
within a biological tissue. It is extensively used to assess cell 
cycle abnormalities induced by environmental contaminants 
capable of negatively influencing the mitotic process. A sig-
nificant decrease of MI can indicate that the tested substance 
has the capacity to interfere in the cell cycle, exerting cyto-
toxic effects or inducing cell cycle arrest (Fiskesjö  1985; 
Rank and Nielsen 1997).
As shown in Fig.  4, the tested samples did not present 
statistically significant differences in terms of their cyto-
toxic effects in Allium cepa ( p ≤ 0.05). However, consider-
ing the aqueous solutions of the target compounds, only 
SMX (at 325 nmol L⁻1 or 82 µg L⁻1) resulted in an MI value 
(19% ± 17%) lower than that for the NC (deionized water, 
MI = 40% ± 15%), suggesting that SMX, an antibiotic com-
monly found in wastewater, could potentially damage the A. 
cepa cells by interfering in metabolic processes essential for 
cell division. This was supported by a previous study dem-
onstrating that SMX acted as a cytotoxic agent, impairing 
the cell cycle in other plant species, such as Vicia faba, by 
inhibiting cell division and inducing genetic damage, even 
at low environmental doses (Drzymała and Kalka 2023). 
These results highlight the environmental risks posed by 
this contaminant to nontarget organisms, emphasizing the 
importance of continuous environmental monitoring.
Although COL is widely recognized as an antimitotic 
agent, an increase of MI in samples exposed to this com-
pound does not necessarily indicate cell proliferation. 
Instead, this behavior is related to the mechanism of action 
of COL on the mitotic spindle. COL binds to tubulin mol-
ecules, which prevents the polymerization of microtubules. 
Consequently, the spindle apparatus responsible for chromo-
some segregation during cell division fails to form properly 
(Levan 1938). This behavior has been widely observed in 
cytogenetic assays using A. cepa (Nicuta et al. 2025; Ros-
sato et al. 2010). As a result, cells can initiate mitosis and 
reach metaphase, but are prevented from proceeding to ana-
phase. This blockage results in the progressive accumula-
tion of cells in metaphase, a phenomenon known as C-met-
aphase, which artificially increases the proportion of cells 
observed in division at the time of microscopic analysis. 
Fig. 3 Evaluation of phytotoxicity using the growth index (GI) val-
ues obtained after exposure of L. sativa seeds to the following sam-
ples: aqueous solutions of colchicine (COL), nitazoxanide (NTZ), 
sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and the mixture of the three compounds 
 (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 325 nmol L⁻ 1; wastewater treatment 
plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP enriched with the three compounds 
 (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after treatment for 10  min and 20  min. 
The dashed line indicates the toxicity threshold, where values below 
the line reflect a phytotoxic effect, while values above the line indi-
cate no toxicity
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
This mechanism also explains the high frequency of chro-
mosomal abnormalities in cells exposed to colchicine, since 
the disruption of microtubule dynamics leads to errors in 
chromosomal segregation and micronuclei formation, and 
other mitotic aberrations.
After 10 and 20 min of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process 
(MI = 39% ± 6% and 39% ± 9%, respectively), there were 
no significant decreases of the mitotic index, compared to 
NC (MI = 40% ± 15%), suggesting that under the conditions 
employed, the process did not produce cytotoxic byproducts 
that could inhibit mitosis in A. cepa. These findings further 
supported the effectiveness of the treatment in degrading 
contaminants, without compromising the biocompatibility 
of the final effluent for use with plants, as also noted in the 
phytotoxicity assessment.
The efficiency of AOPs in reducing effluent toxicity 
depends on the type of process applied, the oxidant dos-
age, the reaction time, and the characteristics of the efflu-
ent. In some cases, toxicity can increase temporarily, due 
to the formation of TPs. Therefore, cytotoxicity assessment 
of WWTP effluents treated by AOPs is essential to ensure 
environmental and public health safety, since although the 
aim of these processes is to reduce the environmental risks 
associated with contaminants, they may also generate toxic 
TPs (Wang and Wang 2021).
Genotoxicity
In the genotoxicity study, events indicating damage to genetic 
material (but not necessarily cell death) in A. cepa were 
counted, including micronuclei, nuclear buds, chromosome 
stickiness, and chromosome breaks (Fiskesjö 1985; Priac et al. 
2017; Rank and Nielsen 1997). As shown in Fig. 5, contrary to 
the previous observations, the WWTP effluent enriched with 
the target compounds (MIXWWTP) had a high genotoxic effect 
(21% ± 10%), close to that of the PC (24% ± 10%). This sug-
gested that the presence of a combination of organic microcon-
taminants in the effluent could lead to DNA damage.
Effluents containing mixtures of contaminants can induce 
genotoxic effects, such as chromosomal and nuclear aber -
rations, resulting either from the individual action of each 
compound or from interactions among different genotox -
ins, which may be synergistic or antagonistic (Souguir 
et al. 2021). Such genotoxic potential is of particular con -
cern when these effluents are reused for irrigation, without 
adequate previous treatment, because microcontaminants 
present in WWTP effluents can be absorbed by plant roots 
and be subsequently transported to other plant structures, 
including leaves and fruits, accumulating to detectable levels 
and with the potential to enter the food chain (Delli Com -
pagni et al. 2020).
Fig. 4 Cytotoxicity evaluation using the mitotic index (MI) values 
obtained after exposure of A. cepa seeds to the following conditions: 
deionized water (negative control, NC); methyl methanesulfonate 
(positive control, PC); aqueous solutions of colchicine (COL), nita-
zoxanide (NTZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and the mixture of the 
three compounds (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 325  nmol L⁻ 1; 
wastewater treatment plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP enriched with 
the three compounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after treatment for 
10 min and 20 min. The error bars indicate the standard deviations. 
The letters above the columns indicate statistical differences rela-
tive to the negative control (NC): the same letters denote no signifi-
cant difference, while different letters indicate a statistical difference 
(Dunn’s test, p ≤ 0.05)
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Application of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process for both 
treatment times effectively reduced genotoxicity, with 
values of 10% ± 5% and 6% ± 4% obtained after treatment 
for 10 and 20 min, respectively. In both cases, there were 
significant numerical reductions in genotoxic events, com-
pared to the exposures to the MIXWWTP and MIXaq samples. 
Treatment for 20 min resulted in a statistically significant 
difference ( p ≤ 0.05), supporting the hypothesis that the 
degradation process did not result in the presence of toxic 
byproducts or parent compounds with genotoxic potential.
Previous work has shown that H2O2/S2O8
2⁻-based AOPs 
combined with UV radiation can generate oxidizing radi-
cals that promote rapid degradation and mineralization of 
compounds such as Bisphenol A, estrogenic compounds, 
pesticides, and antibiotics. This process can significantly 
reduce the toxicity associated with these compounds that 
are commonly detected in WWTP effluents. It has also been 
demonstrated that the formation of toxic byproducts is lower 
for this type of AOP, compared to conventional treatment 
processes (Gabet et al. 2021).
The observed frequencies of chromosomal and nuclear 
aberrations in A. cepa root meristematic cells are shown in 
Fig. S2 (Supplementary Information). The most frequent 
aberration was the presence of micronuclei in a high propor-
tion of the samples. Micronuclei are small extranuclear struc-
tures containing DNA, delimited by membranes (Krupina 
et al. 2021), whose formation is associated with chromo-
somal breaks or the loss of chromosomal fragments during 
cell division, indicating clastogenic or aneugenic effects 
(Fiskesjö 1985; Rank and Nielsen 1997). This alteration is a 
well-established marker for genotoxicity. The micronucleus 
test is a sensitive tool used in ecotoxicology to detect genetic 
damage at low contaminant concentrations in assessments of 
water, soil, and effluent toxicity (Alvarenga et al. 2025).
Exposure to COL significantly increased the frequency 
of C-metaphase, consistent with its mechanism of action 
by interfering with the mitotic spindle and preventing the 
progression of normal cell division (Deftereos et al. 2022). 
In the case of SMX, the observed genotoxicity, with a ten-
dency towards reduced mitotic activity, was consistent with 
the effects reported in other plant models such as V. faba, 
including the induction of micronuclei and chromosomal 
aberrations. SMX has also been shown to increase the activ-
ity of two key antioxidant enzymes, catalase and superoxide 
dismutase, which are essential components of the mecha-
nism protecting the cell against oxidative stress (Drzymala 
and Kalka 2023). The genotoxic effects of NTZ have not 
been reported previously in the literature. In the present 
study, the chromosomal and nuclear aberrations observed 
in seeds exposed to the compound, including chromosomal 
breaks, chromosomal stickiness, C-metaphase, micronuclei, 
and nuclear buds, were indicative of potential clastogenic 
Fig. 5 Evaluation of genotoxicity in A. cepa seeds exposed to the 
following conditions: deionized water negative control (NC); methyl 
methanesulfonate positive control (PC); aqueous solutions of colchi-
cine (COL), nitazoxanide (NTZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and the 
mixture of the three compounds (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 
325 nmol L⁻ 1; wastewater treatment plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP 
enriched with the three compounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after 
treatment for 10 min and 20 min. The error bars indicate the standard 
deviations. The letters above the columns indicate statistical differ -
ences relative to the negative control (NC): the same letters denote 
no significant difference, while different letters indicate a statistical 
difference (Dunn’s test, p ≤ 0.05)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
and aneugenic activity of NTZ. The exposure to MIXaq 
resulted in an increased frequency of micronuclei, together 
with other alterations including adherence, bridges, and 
chromosome loss. Overall, the results suggested that signifi-
cant genotoxic effects could be caused by these compounds, 
both individually and in combination.
Exposure to the WWTP effluent also resulted in high lev-
els of micronuclei, chromosome stickiness, and chromosome 
bridges. This response could be attributed to the complex 
mixtures of genotoxic compounds typically found in such 
effluents, including industrial, domestic, hospital, and agri-
cultural contaminants (Sommagio et al. 2024). The observed 
effects suggested that the genotoxic compounds present in 
this type of effluent can remain after conventional wastewa-
ter treatment.
The genotoxic effects were even more pronounced in 
the sample exposed to MIXWWTP, with a high diversity 
and intensity of aberrations, suggesting a synergistic effect 
among the organic microcontaminants and the matrix. The 
relationship between the concentrations of microcontami-
nants in WWTP effluents and the resulting genotoxicity 
is complex and nonlinear, since interactions of the com-
pounds can influence the observed effects. This complex-
ity emphasizes the importance of using integrated bioas-
says for a more reliable assessment of effluent toxicity 
(Freitas et al. 2023).
When the effluent enriched with the compounds was 
subjected to the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process for times of 
10 and 20 min, there was a general reduction in aberration 
frequency, particularly for micronuclei and chromosome 
stickiness, indicating that the treatment was partially 
effective in mitigating genotoxicity. Nonetheless, aber -
rations such as chromosome bridges and polyploid cells 
were still observed after 20 min of treatment. Previous 
studies have shown that genotoxic effects may persist in 
effluent samples, even after biological, physical, chemi-
cal, and advanced treatment processes, due to the forma-
tion of toxic transformation byproducts or the resistance 
of some microcontaminants to degradation (Gonçalves 
et al. 2023; Sommaggio et al. 2024). This implies the 
need for further studies of the degradation mechanisms 
associated with a proposed process, to elucidate the main 
TPs generated.
Inhibition of microbial growth
Evaluation was made of possible inhibition of Azospirillum 
brasilense and Saccharomyces cerevisiae growth by the 
WWTP effluent after application of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC 
process, as a complementary biocompatibility parameter, 
considering the potential use of the treated effluent for crop 
irrigation. A. brasilense is a plant growth-promoting bac-
terium employed in soybean crops, while S. cerevisiae is a 
yeast that is widely used in fermentation processes and has 
nomadic characteristics, being able to inhabit and persist in 
soils (dormant state), fruits, tree bark, and flowers, among 
others (Silva et al. 2023; Waler and Stewart 2016).
No inhibitory effects on S. cerevisiae growth were 
observed after 24 h of incubation with the WWTP effluent 
or WWTP enriched with the compounds (MIXWWTP, before 
and after application of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process for 
10 or 20 min) (Fig. 6a). This indicated that the degradation 
of organic microcontaminants did not generate products 
capable of interfering with yeast development. When the 
solution of NTZ alone was used, a substantial decrease of 
the optical density (OD) indicated that this compound had 
the potential to interfere with the cell cycle, even at low 
concentrations.
The species A. brasilense presents slow growth, due to 
its characteristic microaerophilic metabolism (Silva et al. 
2023), so the OD measurements (Fig.  6b) were performed 
after incubation for a longer period of 48 h. The high OD 
values obtained for the bacterial samples in contact with 
the WWTP effluent and MIXWWTP suggested that the pres-
ence of organic compounds in the matrix accelerated the 
lag phase of growth. This was probably due to the pres-
ence of substances that acted as nutrients for A. brasilense. 
Hence, if toxic effects occurred, they were masked by the 
beneficial effect of high availability of nitrogen, sulfur, 
phosphorus, calcium, potassium, and other organic com-
ponents of the matrix.
The lower bacterial growth in the effluent treated using 
the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process for times of 10 and 20 min 
could be attributed to reduction of the available organic 
matter, resulting in a less nutrient-rich medium and a 
slower log phase. The lower growth was not necessarily 
due to a greater toxic effect. The previous results indi-
cated that the proposed treatment was able to improve 
the compatibility of the effluent with various organisms. 
Another factor corroborating this assumption was the per -
formance observed for the NC sample, which also showed 
low growth. This interpretation is consistent with the well-
established behavior of AOPs described in the literature, 
in which organic matter acts as an important scavenger 
of reactive radicals and is efficiently degraded during 
treatment. Consequently, the reduced bacterial growth 
observed after the oxidative process could be explained by 
the lower availability of assimilable organic compounds, 
rather than increased toxicity.
Given the complexity of interactions between micro-
contaminants and living organisms, further studies will be 
undertaken to investigate the biocompatibility of WWTP 
effluent after treatment using the proposed oxidative pro-
cess. These studies will aim to increase the sample groups, 
the variety of test organisms, and the parameters consid-
ered, in addition to identifying the main TPs generated.
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Conclusions
The H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC process was highly effective in 
mitigating the toxicity of real sanitary effluent enriched 
with pharmaceutical compounds from different classes. 
Consistent reductions in genotoxic, phytotoxic, and oxi-
dative stress effects, combined with an absence of cyto-
toxicity and microbial growth inhibition, under the condi-
tions evaluated, indicated a substantial reduction in the 
overall ecotoxicological impact of the treated effluent. 
Fig. 6 Optical density (OD), determined by absorbance at 600  nm, 
as a parameter to evaluate the growth of (a) S. cerevisiae and (b) A. 
brasilense exposed to the following conditions: aqueous solutions of 
colchicine (COL), nitazoxanide (NTZ), sulfamethoxazole (SMX), and 
the mixture of the three compounds (MIXaq), all at a concentration of 
325 nmol L⁻ 1; wastewater treatment plant effluent (WWTP); WWTP 
enriched with the three compounds (MIXWWTP); and MIXWWTP after 
treatment for times of 10 and 20  min. The error bars indicate the 
standard deviations. The letters above the columns indicate statisti-
cal differences relative to the negative control (NC): the same letters 
denote no significant difference, while different letters indicate a sta-
tistical difference (Dunn’s test, p ≤ 0.05)
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Furthermore, the results suggested that the transforma-
tion products generated during the oxidation process did 
not contribute to increased adverse biological responses 
in any of the assays.
The integration of multiple ecotoxicological endpoints 
across different levels of biological organization provided 
a comprehensive and environmentally relevant assess-
ment of treatment performance that extended beyond 
conventional chemical criteria. This study contributes to 
the application of hybrid advanced oxidation processes by 
demonstrating the effectiveness of the H2O2/S2O8
2–/UVC 
process in reducing ecotoxicological effects associated 
with pharmaceutical-contaminated sanitary effluents. The 
findings reinforce the importance of incorporating biologi-
cal responses into the evaluation of advanced treatment 
technologies, contributing to the development of safer 
strategies for the management and reuse of wastewater.
Despite these findings, additional studies are required 
to expand the range of test organisms, identify the trans-
formation products formed during treatment, evaluate 
long-term effects, and assess process performance under 
larger-scale operating conditions and with different envi-
ronmental matrices.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11356- 026- 38218-5.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Fundação de Amparo 
à Pesquisa do Estado de Minas Gerais (FAPEMIG), Conselho Nacional 
de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), Coordenação 
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and 
the Multiuser Laboratories of the Federal University of Uberlândia 
(RELAM-UFU).
Author contribution Lucas Gustavo da Costa: Conceptualization, 
Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing—
original draft, Writing—review & editing and Visualization; Gabrielly 
Machado dos Santos: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation; Eduardo Oliveira Marson: Methodology, Validation, Formal 
analysis, Investigation; Maria Gabriela Franco de Lima: Methodology, 
Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation; Meliza Arantes de Souza 
Bessa: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation; Guil-
herme Scarafiz: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation; Sidney Fer-
nandes Sales Junior: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation; Enrico Saggioro: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, 
Resources; Solidônio Rodrigues de Carvalho: Writing—review & edit-
ing, Funding acquisition; Adão de Siqueira Ferreira: Validation, Formal 
analysis, Investigation, Resources; Jeamylle Nilin: Validation, Formal 
analysis, Investigation, Resources, Writing—review & editing, Funding 
acquisition; Waldomiro Borges Neto: Methodology, Validation, Formal 
analysis; Alam Gustavo Trovó: Resources, Writing—review & editing, 
Visualization, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisi-
tion. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding The Article Processing Charge (APC) for the publication 
of this research was funded by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento 
de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil (CAPES) (ROR identifier: 
00x0ma614). This work was funded by FAPEMIG (research pro-
ject 040/2022), CNPq (grants 307137/2021–0, 440388/2024–4, and 
401487/2025–3), and CAPES (Finance Code 001). Research support 
was received from FAPEMIG by Solidônio Rodrigues de Carvalho, 
from CNPq by Alam Gustavo Trovó and Jeamylle Nillin, and from 
CAPES by Lucas Gustavo da Costa and Gabrielly Machado dos Santos.
Data availability The authors declare that the data supporting the find-
ings of this study are available within the paper, its supplementary 
information files.
Declarations 
Ethical approval This is not applicable.
Consent to participate This is not applicable.
Consent for publication This is not applicable.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Clinical trial number Not applicable.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Akagawa M (2021) Protein carbonylation: molecular mechanisms, 
biological implications, and analytical approaches. Free Radic 
Res 55:307–320. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10715 762. 2020. 18510 27
Al-Kuraishy HM, Al-Garee AI, Elekhnawy E, El-Saber Batiha G 
(2022) Nitazoxanide and COVID-19: a review. Mol Biol Rep 
49:11169–11176. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11033- 022- 07822-2
Alvarenga IFS, Silveira GL, Silva GH, Martins GC, Silva LM, Guil-
herme LRG, Andrade-Vieira LF (2025) Eco(geno)toxicologic 
effects of arsenic-contaminated tropical soils: plant bioassays via 
the microplate approach. Ecotoxicology 34:2085. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s10646- 025- 02974-w
American Society for Testing & Materials (ASTM) (2012) ASTM 
E1676-12: Standard guide for conducting laboratory soil toxicity 
or bioaccumulation tests with the Lumbricid earthworm Eisenia 
Fetida and the Enchytraeid potworm Enchytraeus albidus. Penn-
sylvania, USA
Araujo GF, Espírito Santo DG, Sales SF Jr, Correia FV, Saggioro EM 
(2024) Toxicological approaches as tool to assess the effects of 
a mixture of photocatalytic degradation products originated from 
the unregulated neonicotinoid acetamiprid employing a terrestrial 
organism (Eisenia andrei). Sci Total Environ 906:167271. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2023. 167271
Ayala A, Muñoz MF, Argüelles S (2014) Lipid peroxidation: pro-
duction, metabolism, and signaling mechanisms of malondi-
aldehyde and 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal. Oxid Med Cell Longevity 
2014:360438. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1155/ 2014/ 360438
 Environmental Science and Pollution Research
Batool N, Munazir M, Qureshi R, Anwar T, Qureshi H, Saba I, Ikram 
S, Ullah N, Soufan W, Zaman W (2024) Morphological and physi-
ological responses of Momordica charantia to heavy metals and 
nutrient toxicity in contaminated water. Sci Rep 14:1. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 024- 80234-3
Bilgiç E, Baba A (2023) Effect of urbanization on water resources: 
challenges and prospects. In: Ali S, Armanuos AM (eds.) 
Groundwater in arid and semi-arid areas. Earth and Environ-
mental Sciences Library, Springer, New York, pp. 81–108. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 031- 43348-1_4
Costa LG, Marson EO, Santos GM, Borges Neto W, Carvalho SR, 
Trovó AG (2025) Enhanced UVC treatment for removal of 
micropollutants using a combination of the oxidants H2O2 and 
 S2O8
2–. J Environ Chem Eng 31:116438. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. jece. 2025. 116438
Deftereos SG, Beerkens FJ, Shah B, Giannopoulos G, Vrachatis DA, 
Giotaki SG, Siasos G, Nicolas J, Arnott C, Patel S, Parsons M, 
Tardif JC, Kovacic JC, Dangas GD (2022) Colchicine in cardio-
vascular disease: in-depth review. Circulation 145:61. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1161/ CIRCU LATIO NAHA. 121. 056171
Delli Compagni R, Gabrielli M, Polesel F, Turolla A, Trapp S, Vez-
zaro L, Antonelli M (2020) Risk assessment of contaminants 
of emerging concern in the context of wastewater reuse for 
irrigation: an integrated modelling approach. Chemosphere 
242:125185. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. chemo sphere. 2019. 
125185
Drzymała J, Kalka J (2023) Assessment of genotoxicity, mutagen-
icity, and cytotoxicity of diclofenac and sulfamethoxazole at 
environmental concentrations on Vicia faba. Int J Environ Sci 
Technol 21:3633. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s13762- 023- 05238-4
Esterbauer H, Cheeseman KH (1990) Determination of aldehydic 
lipid peroxidation products: malonaldehyde and 4-hydroxynon-
enal. Methods Enzymol 189:407–421. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
0076- 6879(90) 86134-H
European Union (2022) Proposal for a Directive of the European 
Parliament and of the Council Concerning Urban Wastewater 
Treatment (recast) COM/2022/541, Brussels
Fiskesjö G (1985) The Allium test as a standard in environmental 
monitoring. Hereditas 102:99–112. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 
1601- 5223. 1985. tb004 71.x
Freitas RMP, Benvindo-Souza M, Vieira TB, Martins T, Melo e Silva 
D (2023) Multi-taxon trends and the application of genotoxic 
biomarkers in the analysis of effluents from sewage treatment 
plant. Heliyon 9:e22516. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. heliy on. 2023. 
e22516
Gabet A, Métivier H, Brauer C, Mailhot G, Brigante M (2021) Hydro-
gen peroxide and persulfate activation using UVA-UVB radiation: 
degradation of estrogenic compounds and application in sewage 
treatment plant waters. J Hazard Mater 405:124693. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. jhazm at. 2020. 124693
Gonçalves BR, Della-Flora A, Sirtori C, Sousa RMF, Starling MCVM, 
Sánchez Pérez JA, Saggioro EM, Sales Jr SF, Trovó AG (2023) 
Influence of water matrix components and peroxide sources on 
the transformation products and toxicity of tebuthiuron under 
UVC-based advanced oxidation processes. Sci Total Environ 
859:160120. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2022. 160120
Krupina K, Goginashvili A, Cleveland DW (2021) Causes and conse-
quences of micronuclei. Curr Opin Cell Biol 70:91. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. ceb. 2021. 01. 004
Kümmerer K (2009) The presence of pharmaceuticals in the environ-
ment due to human use – present knowledge and future challenges. 
J Environ Manage 90:2354–2366. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jenvm 
an. 2009. 01. 023
Levan A (1938) The effect of colchicine on root mitoses in allium. 
Hereditas 24:471–486
Lowry OH, Rosebrough NJ, Farr AL, Randall RJ (1951) Protein meas-
urement with the Folin phenol reagent. J Biol Chem 193:265–275. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0021- 9258(19) 52451-6
Marson EO, Paniagua CES, Gomes O Jr, Gonçalves BR, Silva VM, 
Ricardo IA, Starling MCVM, Amorim CC, Trovó AG (2022) A 
review toward contaminants of emerging concern in Brazil: occur-
rence, impact and their degradation by advanced oxidation process 
in aquatic matrices. Sci Total Environ 836:155605. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2022. 155605
Meher AK, Zarouri A (2025) Environmental applications of mass 
spectrometry for emerging contaminants. Molecules 30:364. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ molec ules3 00203 64
Mesquita CS, Oliveira R, Bento F, Geraldo D, Rodrigues JV, Mar -
cos JC (2014) Simplified 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine spectro-
photometric assay for quantification of carbonyls in oxidized 
proteins. Anal Biochem 458:69–71. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
ab. 2014. 04. 034
Monteiro SC, Boxall AB (2010) Occurrence and fate of human phar -
maceuticals in the environment. Reviews of environmental con-
tamination and toxicology. Springer, New York, pp 53–154. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 4419- 1157-5_2
Nicuta D, Grosu L, Patriciu OI, Voicu RE, Alexa IC (2025) The 
Allium cepa model: a review of its application as a cytoge-
netic tool for evaluating the biosafety potential of plant extracts. 
Methods Protoc 8. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ mps80 40088
Obando-González RI, Martínez-Hernández LE, Núñez-Muñoz LA, 
Calderón-Pérez B, Ruiz-Medrano R, Ramírez-Pool JA, Xocon-
ostle-Cázares B (2024) Plant growth enhancement in colchi-
cine-treated tomato seeds without polyploidy induction. Plant 
Mol Biol 115:1. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11103- 024- 01521-1
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
(1984) Test no 207: earthworm, acute toxicity tests, OECD 
guidelines for the testing of chemicals, section 2., Washington
Pal AK, Nandave M, Kaithwas G (2020) Chemoprophylactic activ -
ity of nitazoxanide in experimental model of mammary gland 
carcinoma in rats. 3 Biotech 10:338. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s13205- 020- 02332-z
Priac A, Badot P-M, Crini G (2017) Treated wastewater phytotoxic-
ity assessment using Lactuca sativa: focus on germination and 
root elongation test parameters. C R Biol 340:188–194. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. crvi. 2017. 01. 002
Rank J, Nielsen MH (1997) Allium cepa anaphase–telophase root 
tip chromosome aberration assay on N-methyl-N-nitrosourea, 
maleic hydrazide, sodium azide, and ethyl methanesulfonate. 
Mutat Res 390:121–127. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ s0165- 
1218(97) 00008-6
Rossato LV, Tedesco SB, Laughinghouse HD, Farias JG, Nicoloso FT 
(2010) Alterations in the mitotic index of Allium cepa induced by 
infusions of Pluchea sagittalis submitted to three different cultiva-
tion systems. An Acad Bras Cienc 82:857–860. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1590/ S0001- 37652 01000 04000 07
Sales SF Jr, Mannarino CF, Bila DM, Parente CET, Correia FV, Sag-
gioro EM (2021) Lethal and long-term effects of landfill leachate 
on Eisenia andrei earthworms: behavior, reproduction and risk 
assessment. J Environ Manage 285:112029. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. jenvm an. 2021. 112029
Silva RM, Oliveira AF, Soares RS, Souza TC, Silva DS, Vieira GP, 
Neves MC, Ribeiro RF (2023) Inoculation with Azospirillum bra-
silense strains AbV5 and AbV6 increases nutrition, chlorophyll, 
and leaf yield of hydroponic lettuce. Plants 12:3107. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 3390/ plant s1217 3107
Sommaggio LRD, Mazzeo DEC, Malvestiti JA, Dantas RF, Marin-
Morales MA (2024) Influence of ozonation and UV/H 2O2 on the 
genotoxicity of secondary wastewater effluents. Sci Total Environ 
919:170883. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. scito tenv. 2024. 170883
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 
Souguir D, Hörmann G, Halis S, Jatoi BW, Hachicha M (2021) Geno-
toxic potential of soils irrigated with treated wastewater: case of the 
Cebala-Borj Touil irrigated perimeter (Tunisia). Appl Ecol Environ 
Res 19:2073. https:// doi. org/ 10. 15666/ aeer/ 1903_ 20732 090
Sousa TS, Ferreira EP, Vieira PA, Reis MHM (2022) Decoration 
of alumina hollow fibers with zinc oxide: improvement of the 
photocatalytic system for methylene blue degradation. Envi-
ron Sci Pollut Res 29:66741–66756. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s11356- 022- 20397-6
Trovó AG, Pinna-Hernández MG, Jambrina-Hernández E, Agüera A, 
López JLC, Sánchez Pérez JÁ (2024) Coupling UVC254nm-LED/
H2O2 and Fenton processes for disinfection and contaminants of 
emerging concern removal in continuous mode for wastewater rec-
lamation in accordance with EU 2020/741. J Environ Chem Eng 
12:114123–114133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jece. 2024. 114123
Vazquez A, Zawoznik M, Benavides MP, Groppa MD (2021) Azospiril-
lum brasilense Az39 restricts cadmium entrance into wheat plants 
and mitigates cadmium stress. Plant Sci 312:111056. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/j. plant sci. 2021. 111056
Verma S, Hariwal M, Kumar S (2024) Exploratory analysis of agro-mor-
phological characteristics in Nigella sativa L. plant genotypes to deter-
mine mutagen colchicine ameliorative/ non-ameliorative impacts. Sci 
Rep 14:24521. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/ s41598- 024- 75755-w
Wacławek S, Lutze HV, Grübel K, Padil VVT, Černík M, Dionysiou 
DD (2017) Chemistry of persulfates in water and wastewater treat-
ment: a review. Chem Eng J 330:44–62. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
cej. 2017. 07. 132
Walker GM, Stewart GG (2016) Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the pro-
duction of fermented beverages. Beverages 2:30. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 3390/ bever ages2 040030
Wang J, Wang S (2021) Toxicity changes of wastewater during vari-
ous advanced oxidation processes treatment: an overview. J Clean 
Prod 315:128202. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jclep ro. 2021. 128202
Yang Y, Jia J, Han T, Zhang H, Wang Y, Shao L, Wang X (2025) Inte-
grated analysis of metabolites and biological endpoints bring new 
insights into sulfamethoxazole stress tolerance in ryegrass. Plants 
(Basel) 14:538. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ plant s1404 0538
Younas H, Younas F (2022) Wastewater application in agriculture - a 
review. Water Air Soil Pollut 233:239. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s11270- 022- 05749-9
Žaltauskaitė J, Miškelytė D, Sujetovienė G, Dikšaitytė A, Kacienė G, 
Januškaitienė I, Dagiliūtė R (2025) Comprehensive tetracycline, 
ciprofloxacin and sulfamethoxazole toxicity evaluation to earth-
worm Dendrobaena veneta through life-cycle, behavioral and bio-
chemical parameters. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 113:104609. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. etap. 2024. 104609
Zhang Y, Li L, Pan Z, Zhu Y, Shao Y, Wang Y, Yu K (2020) Degra-
dation of sulfamethoxazole by UV/persulfate in different water 
samples: influential factors, transformation products and toxic-
ity. Chem Eng J 379:122354. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cej. 2019. 
122354
Zhang S-N, Zhou Y-T, Xia J, Wang Y-M, Ma J-W, Wang L-K, Hayat 
K, Bai S, Li C, Qian M-R, Lin H (2024) Combined effects of 
cadmium and sulfamethoxazole on Eisenia fetida: insights into 
accumulation, subcellular partitioning, biomarkers and toxicologi-
cal responses. Sci Total Environ 935:173303. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. scito tenv. 2024. 173303
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Lucas Gustavo da Costa1 · Gabrielly Machado dos Santos1 · Eduardo Oliveira Marson1 · 
Maria Gabriela Franco de Lima2 · Meliza Arantes de Souza Bessa3 · Guilherme Scarafiz4 · 
Sidney Fernandes Sales Junior5 · Enrico Mendes Saggioro5 · Solidônio Rodrigues de Carvalho4 · 
Adão de Siqueira Ferreira3 · Jeamylle Nilin2 · Waldomiro Borges Neto1 · Alam Gustavo Trovó1 
 * Alam Gustavo Trovó 
 alamtrovo@ufu.br
1 Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Uberlândia, 
Uberlândia, Minas Gerais 38400-902, Brazil
2 Institute of Biology, Federal University of Uberlândia, 
Uberlândia, Minas Gerais 38405-302, Brazil
3 Institute of Agrarian Sciences, Federal University 
of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Minas Gerais 38400-734, Brazil
4 Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Federal University 
of Uberlândia, Uberlândia, Minas Gerais 38410-337, Brazil
5 Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, 
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro 21041-210, Brazil