Effects of capping on microbial populations and contaminant immobilization in an old unlined landfill 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content
 Abstract This research aimed at evaluating the effects of capping on the mitigation of impacts generated by a closed unlined landfill in SAo Carlos, SP, Brazil. Physicochemical and microbiological analyses (16S rRNA sequencing) of buried solid waste samples were performed, in capped and uncapped areas. Even though leachate pockets could still be encountered in capped areas, the capping construction reduced oxygen availability and created more reducing conditions, propitiating the development of sulfate-reducing bacteria and possibly contributing to the precipitation of the metals Pb, Cd, Ni, Co, As, and Zn as metal sulfides, causing their immobilization. The microbial populations adapted to the anaerobic conditions created under capped zones belonged to the phyla Firmicutes, Chloroflexi, and Euryarchaeota and the genera Methanosaeta, Hydrogenispora, Smithella, and Gelria. Differently, the phyla Acidobacteria, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria were more abundant in samples from the uncapped zones, in which the abundance of different genera varied homogeneously. Methanogenic activity was not impaired by the intervention measure, as assessed by the specific methanogenic activity (SMA). Capping of old unlined landfills brings benefits to the immobilization of metals and does not impair microbial degradation, being effective for the mitigation of impacts on soils and water resources. Loading... Quotes 0 citations in 0 citations in Journal Title Journal ISSN Volume Title Publisher Springer URL external URI https://hdl.handle.net/10115/177197 External URL DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-023-27311-8 Date 2023-05-01 Description Keywords Administração pública e de empresas, ciências contábeis e turismo , Astronomia / física , Biodiversidade , Biotecnología , Ciência de alimentos , Ciências agrárias i , Ciências ambientais , Ciências biológicas i , Ciências biológicas ii , Ciências biológicas iii , Enfermagem , Engenharias i , Engenharias ii , Engenharias iii , Ensino , Environmental chemistry , Environmental sciences , Farmacia , General medicine , Geociências , Geografía , Health, toxicology and mutagenesis , Interdisciplinar , Materiais , Medicina i , Medicina ii , Medicina iii , Medicina veterinaria , Medicine (miscellaneous) , Nutrição , Odontología , Planejamento urbano e regional / demografia , Pollution , Química , Saúde coletiva , Zootecnia / recursos pesqueiros Citation Morita, Alice Kimie Martins; Sakamoto, Isabel Kimiko; Varesche, Maria Bernadete Amancio; Wendland, Edson (2023). Effects of capping on microbial populations and contaminant immobilization in an old unlined landfill. Environmental Science And Pollution Research, 30(26), 68548-68562. DOI: 10.1007/s11356-023-27311-8 Collections Artículos de Revista Endorsement Review Supplemented By Referenced By Statistics Views 10 Downloads 12 Bibliographic managers Full item page Document viewer Select a file to preview: Accepted_manuscript.pdf Accepted_manuscript.pdf Reload