Abstract Bees are crucial for pollination, producing 35% of the world’s fruits, nuts, and vegetables. However, the decline in bee populations due to habitat loss, monoculture farming, pesticide use, and urbanization threatens biodiversity and agricultural sustainability. Thus, it is critical to identify additional resources for pollinators. Centipedegrass ( Eremochloa ophiuroides ) is a common turfgrass in the southeastern United States, which can provide pollen resources to foraging bees. The objectives of this study were to determine (1) pollen load composition of bees foraging on centipedegrass spikes, and (2) the utilization of centipedegrass pollen for larval development. In 2021 and 2022, foraging bees were collected from five centipedegrass lawns at 10–12 d and 14–16 d post-mowing (early and late flowering phases), and pollen loads were examined. Bees collected significantly more Poaceae than non-Poaceae pollen, and their pollen counts were significantly greater during early than late flowering in 2021 and 2022. Bombus spp. foraged more in September than in other months from centipedegrass. Pollen metabarcoding revealed that bees foraging on centipedegrass frequently collected pollen from other grasses ( Zoysia and Paspalum ) as well as non-grasses ( Hedera , Lagerstroemia , Solanum , and Ulmus ). The no-choice experiment showed that similar numbers of Bombus impatiens Cresson larvae developed feeding on centipedegrass pollen compared to those developed on butterfly bush. Thus, the data show that bees collect centipedegrass pollen, and that the pollen is of sufficient quality to support larval and pupal development. Implications for insect conservation Our results demonstrate that centipedegrass can provide a valuable pollen resource for generalist bees and may contribute to sustaining pollinator communities in managed landscapes when traditional floral resources become limited. Conservation and landscape management practices should therefore consider incorporating centipedegrass into urban, and suburban settings as complementary forage resources, particularly during periods of floral scarcity in late summer and fall.