Abstract Bacteriophages are abundant and diverse in soils, playing a major role in regulating bacterial communities and consequently affecting biogeochemical cycles. Such host-phage interactions may be influenced by fluctuations in soil moisture, as observed in wetlands soils which constitute a key feature of the ongoing climate change. Here, we investigated the spatial and temporal dynamics of both bacteria and T4-type bacteriophage community structures and diversities in soil of a freshwater wetland. Soil was sampled in three sites across a proximal soil transect presenting an increase moisture content at seven dates over an 18 months period with contrasted flooding periods. DNA was extracted and we applied amplicon sequencing of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene and viral g23 gene. Bacterial community composition varied across the proximal soil transect, with Methylomirabilia and Gammaproteobacteria being significantly enriched in the wettest site and comprising ASVs affiliated to methanotroph and denitrifying bacteria, respectively. We identified a large diversity of T4-type phages, among which a fraction was novel, while others were similar to phages previously sequenced from various biomes. These findings suggest that T4-type phages are capable of successfully colonizing diverse niches in the biosphere, contributing to their ubiquity and diversity. Viral community was however dominated by few vASVs, which were highly represented in one or two of the three studied sites supporting the Bank model. All together our results indicate that T4-type phages have broad host ranges and more likely follow bacterial population dynamics. The present study provides new insights into the role of phages in soil, highlighting their interactions with bacterial hosts involved in carbon and nitrogen cycles, interactions that are likely regulated by fluctuations in soil moisture, as observed in wetlands. Highlights Both bacterial and T4-type phages were structured across proximal sites Bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy number was inversely correlated to the soil moisture 26 viral ASVs did not cluster with reference sequences viral ASVs seem to be primarily controlled by host availability Soil bacteria and phage diversities were significantly lower in the wettest site