Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain
 - Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main navigation 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact & Help 
 Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search content at Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Research units 
 
 
 
 Research output 
 
 
 
 Datasets 
 
 
 
 Projects 
 
 
 
 Press/Media 
 
 
 
 Activities 
 
 
 
 Prizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain 
 Bo Wang , Peng Zhu , Jos van Dam , Coen Ritsema , Wenbin Wu , Wenjuan Li * * Corresponding author for this work 
 WIMEK Soil Physics and Land Management 
 
 Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 The conventional winter wheat-summer maize rotation system (WM) achieves high crop yields with persistent groundwater table depletion in the North China Plain (NCP). The joint impact of optimized irrigation and cropping systems adjustments on water-groundwater dynamics in WM rotation remains poorly understood. This study aimed to evaluated the efficacy of integrating optimized irrigation with legume-based rotations in reducing water use, enhancing productivity, and mitigating groundwater depletion in the NCP. Hydrological processes and crop growth (2004–2024) were simulated using the soil-water-atmosphere-plant (SWAP) model to compare conventional WM (three irrigation regimes) with P-WM and S-WM rotations. System performance was evaluated across hydrologic, agronomic, nutritional and economic indicators, with Entropy-TOPSIS identifying the optimal strategy. Compared to the conventional WM scenario, the legume-based rotations (P-WM and S-WM) demonstrated superior hydrological performance, significantly reduced system ETa by 26.6–27.4% and mitigated groundwater level decline by approximately 1.14 m and 1.13 m per year, respectively. The P-WM was the superior scenario, increasing equivalent water productivity and economic output by 20.3% and 72.1%, respectively, while reducing the water footprint by 17.0%. Both diversified rotations enhanced the efficiency of water use relative to yield productivity, protein and economic outputs. The comprehensive evaluation identified P-WM rotation as the optimal system for balancing productivity and groundwater sustainability. Our results indicate that integrating legume-based rotations with optimized irrigation effectively promotes sustainable agriculture in the NCP. This synergy mitigates groundwater depletion while securing economic and nutritional outputs, providing a scalable model for other water-scarce regions. 
 Original language English Article number 104894 Journal Agricultural Systems Volume 238 DOIs https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 Publication status Published - Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 Keywords Groundwater level Irrigation regime Legume-based rotations SWAP model Water productivity 
 
 
 
 Access to Document 
 10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 https://edepot.wur.nl/720855 Licence: Taverne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 Dive into the research topics of 'Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 China 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crop Rotation 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Water Table 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Water Use 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cropping System 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irrigation System 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Irrigation Management 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Common Wheat 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View full fingerprint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this 
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 Author
 
 
 
 BIBTEX
 
 
 
 Harvard
 
 
 
 Standard
 
 
 
 RIS
 
 
 
 Vancouver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wang, B., Zhu, P. , van Dam, J. , Ritsema, C. , Wu, W., & Li, W. (2026). Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain . Agricultural Systems , 238 , Article 104894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 
 
 
 
 Wang, Bo ; Zhu, Peng ; van Dam, Jos et al. / Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain . In: Agricultural Systems . 2026 ; Vol. 238. 
 
 
 
 @article{c15c297976c34d44af50e85fef0cdeb6, title = "Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain", abstract = "The conventional winter wheat-summer maize rotation system (WM) achieves high crop yields with persistent groundwater table depletion in the North China Plain (NCP). The joint impact of optimized irrigation and cropping systems adjustments on water-groundwater dynamics in WM rotation remains poorly understood. This study aimed to evaluated the efficacy of integrating optimized irrigation with legume-based rotations in reducing water use, enhancing productivity, and mitigating groundwater depletion in the NCP. Hydrological processes and crop growth (2004–2024) were simulated using the soil-water-atmosphere-plant (SWAP) model to compare conventional WM (three irrigation regimes) with P-WM and S-WM rotations. System performance was evaluated across hydrologic, agronomic, nutritional and economic indicators, with Entropy-TOPSIS identifying the optimal strategy. Compared to the conventional WM scenario, the legume-based rotations (P-WM and S-WM) demonstrated superior hydrological performance, significantly reduced system ETa by 26.6–27.4\% and mitigated groundwater level decline by approximately 1.14 m and 1.13 m per year, respectively. The P-WM was the superior scenario, increasing equivalent water productivity and economic output by 20.3\% and 72.1\%, respectively, while reducing the water footprint by 17.0\%. Both diversified rotations enhanced the efficiency of water use relative to yield productivity, protein and economic outputs. The comprehensive evaluation identified P-WM rotation as the optimal system for balancing productivity and groundwater sustainability. Our results indicate that integrating legume-based rotations with optimized irrigation effectively promotes sustainable agriculture in the NCP. This synergy mitigates groundwater depletion while securing economic and nutritional outputs, providing a scalable model for other water-scarce regions.", keywords = "Groundwater level, Irrigation regime, Legume-based rotations, SWAP model, Water productivity", author = "Bo Wang and Peng Zhu and \{van Dam\}, Jos and Coen Ritsema and Wenbin Wu and Wenjuan Li", year = "2026", month = oct, doi = "10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894", language = "English", volume = "238", journal = "Agricultural Systems", issn = "0308-521X", publisher = "Elsevier", } 
 
 
 
 Wang, B, Zhu, P , van Dam, J , Ritsema, C , Wu, W & Li, W 2026, ' Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain ', Agricultural Systems , vol. 238, 104894. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 
 
 
 
 Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain. / Wang, Bo; Zhu, Peng ; van Dam, Jos et al. In: Agricultural Systems , Vol. 238, 104894, 10.2026. Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 TY - JOUR T1 - Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain AU - Wang, Bo AU - Zhu, Peng AU - van Dam, Jos AU - Ritsema, Coen AU - Wu, Wenbin AU - Li, Wenjuan PY - 2026/10 Y1 - 2026/10 N2 - The conventional winter wheat-summer maize rotation system (WM) achieves high crop yields with persistent groundwater table depletion in the North China Plain (NCP). The joint impact of optimized irrigation and cropping systems adjustments on water-groundwater dynamics in WM rotation remains poorly understood. This study aimed to evaluated the efficacy of integrating optimized irrigation with legume-based rotations in reducing water use, enhancing productivity, and mitigating groundwater depletion in the NCP. Hydrological processes and crop growth (2004–2024) were simulated using the soil-water-atmosphere-plant (SWAP) model to compare conventional WM (three irrigation regimes) with P-WM and S-WM rotations. System performance was evaluated across hydrologic, agronomic, nutritional and economic indicators, with Entropy-TOPSIS identifying the optimal strategy. Compared to the conventional WM scenario, the legume-based rotations (P-WM and S-WM) demonstrated superior hydrological performance, significantly reduced system ETa by 26.6–27.4% and mitigated groundwater level decline by approximately 1.14 m and 1.13 m per year, respectively. The P-WM was the superior scenario, increasing equivalent water productivity and economic output by 20.3% and 72.1%, respectively, while reducing the water footprint by 17.0%. Both diversified rotations enhanced the efficiency of water use relative to yield productivity, protein and economic outputs. The comprehensive evaluation identified P-WM rotation as the optimal system for balancing productivity and groundwater sustainability. Our results indicate that integrating legume-based rotations with optimized irrigation effectively promotes sustainable agriculture in the NCP. This synergy mitigates groundwater depletion while securing economic and nutritional outputs, providing a scalable model for other water-scarce regions. AB - The conventional winter wheat-summer maize rotation system (WM) achieves high crop yields with persistent groundwater table depletion in the North China Plain (NCP). The joint impact of optimized irrigation and cropping systems adjustments on water-groundwater dynamics in WM rotation remains poorly understood. This study aimed to evaluated the efficacy of integrating optimized irrigation with legume-based rotations in reducing water use, enhancing productivity, and mitigating groundwater depletion in the NCP. Hydrological processes and crop growth (2004–2024) were simulated using the soil-water-atmosphere-plant (SWAP) model to compare conventional WM (three irrigation regimes) with P-WM and S-WM rotations. System performance was evaluated across hydrologic, agronomic, nutritional and economic indicators, with Entropy-TOPSIS identifying the optimal strategy. Compared to the conventional WM scenario, the legume-based rotations (P-WM and S-WM) demonstrated superior hydrological performance, significantly reduced system ETa by 26.6–27.4% and mitigated groundwater level decline by approximately 1.14 m and 1.13 m per year, respectively. The P-WM was the superior scenario, increasing equivalent water productivity and economic output by 20.3% and 72.1%, respectively, while reducing the water footprint by 17.0%. Both diversified rotations enhanced the efficiency of water use relative to yield productivity, protein and economic outputs. The comprehensive evaluation identified P-WM rotation as the optimal system for balancing productivity and groundwater sustainability. Our results indicate that integrating legume-based rotations with optimized irrigation effectively promotes sustainable agriculture in the NCP. This synergy mitigates groundwater depletion while securing economic and nutritional outputs, providing a scalable model for other water-scarce regions. KW - Groundwater level KW - Irrigation regime KW - Legume-based rotations KW - SWAP model KW - Water productivity U2 - 10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 DO - 10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 M3 - Article AN - SCOPUS:105045167147 SN - 0308-521X VL - 238 JO - Agricultural Systems JF - Agricultural Systems M1 - 104894 ER - 
 
 
 
 Wang B, Zhu P , van Dam J , Ritsema C , Wu W, Li W. Impacts of optimized irrigation and diversified crop rotations on groundwater sustainability and productivity in the North China Plain . Agricultural Systems . 2026 Oct;238:104894. doi: 10.1016/j.agsy.2026.104894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Powered by Pure Link opens in a new tab , Scopus Link opens in a new tab & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine&trade; Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 All content on this site: Copyright &copy; 2026 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply
 
 We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research data protection policy Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 About web accessibility Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report vulnerability Link opens in a new tab