A study on the synthesis and characterization of maleate-functionalized Artemisia vulgaris hydrogel for Ni(II) adsorption from groundwater: mechanism, kinetics, and reusability | BMC Chemistry | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Chemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 A study on the synthesis and characterization of maleate-functionalized Artemisia vulgaris hydrogel for Ni(II) adsorption from groundwater: mechanism, kinetics, and reusability 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 21 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Chemistry 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A study on the synthesis and characterization of maleate-functionalized Artemisia vulgaris hydrogel for Ni(II) adsorption from groundwater: mechanism, kinetics, and reusability
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arshad Ali 1 , Azhar Abbas 2 , Nasir Assad  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0004-9435-1414 2 , Essam R. I. Mahmoud 3 , Akhtar Hayat 4 , Farooq Ahmad 5 , Ibrahim A. Shaaban 6 & … Dawit Kifle 7   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Life on Earth is at risk due to widespread pollution from industrialization and human activities. The presence of harmful heavy metal ions in drinking water sources is amongst the key pollutants that require immediate remediation. The seeds of the Artemisia vulgaris plant were used to extract the hydrogel, i.e., A. vulgar hydrogel (AVH). Following a base-catalyzed esterification process, the AVH was esterified with maleic anhydride (MAn) to produce maleated-AVH (ML-AVH). After saponification with NaHCO 3 , the ML-AVH was converted to the sodic form of ML-AVH (Na-ML-AVH). The development of ML-AVH and Na-ML-AVH and the loading of nickel (Ni(II)) were verified by the Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopic analysis of AVH, ML-AVH, Na-ML-AVH, and Ni(II)-loaded Na-ML-AVH (Ni-ML-AVH). Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) analysis revealed an increased specific surface area of Na-ML-AVH relative to AVH, indicating the generation of additional accessible adsorption sites. The thermogravimetric (TGA) analysis revealed the greater stability of Na-ML-AVH over AVH. The Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) patterns showed structural modification of AVH after conversion to Na-ML-AVH. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures showed the rough and porous characteristics of AVH, ML-AVH, Na-ML-AVH, and Ni-ML-AVH. The point-zero charge pH (pH ZPC ) of Na-ML-AVH was 5.17, indicating that its surface is negatively charged. According to the Langmuir isotherm, the maximum adsorption capacity of Na-ML-AVH to remediate Ni(II) was 200 mg/g for distilled water (DW) and 196.07 mg/g for groundwater (GW). The Ni(II) adsorption on the Na-ML-AVH surface was best explained by the pseudo-second-order kinetic model. Ion-exchange processes were implicated in Ni(II) adsorption, bestowing to the FTIR, Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis, and the perfect fitting of Boyd’s model to the Ni(II) adsorption data. The thermodynamic investigations demonstrated that Ni(II) adsorption by Na-ML-AVH is spontaneous and exothermic in nature. Since the Na-ML-AVH was discovered to be regenerable, it can be used several times before needing to be replaced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 TDH-CSNP-Loaded Katira/Corn Starch Hydrogels for Eco-friendly Heavy Metal Remediation
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 31 October 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Removal of copper ions by cellulose nanocrystal-based hydrogel and reduced adsorbents for its catalytic properties
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 15 April 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Maleated Hydroxyethyl Cellulose for&#xa0;the Efficient Removal of Cd(II) Ions from&#xa0;an Aqueous Solution: Isothermal, Kinetic and Regeneration Studies
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 19 July 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Bioinorganic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 Biomethanol 
 
 
 
 Mineral Trioxide Aggregate 
 
 
 
 Metal-organic Frameworks 
 
 
 
 Gels and Hydrogels 
 
 
 
 Inorganic Chemistry 
 
 
 
 Green Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticles for Biomedical Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at Northern Border University, Arar, KSA for funding this research work through the project number “NBU-FFR-2026-1243-17’’. The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University, Saudi Arabia, through Large Research Project under grant number RGP-2/304/ /47. The authors also extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research, Islamic University of Madinah, Saudi Arabia, for funding this research work. Funding Not applicable. Author information Authors and Affiliations Institute of Chemistry, University of Sargodha, Sargodha, 40100, Pakistan Arshad Ali International Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Sciences, The University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan Azhar Abbas & Nasir Assad Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Islamic University of Madinah, Madinah, 42351, Saudi Arabia Essam R. I. Mahmoud Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Islamic University of Madinah, Madinah, 42351, Saudi Arabia Akhtar Hayat Department of Chemical and Materials Engineering, College of Engineering, Northern Border University, Arar, Saudi Arabia Farooq Ahmad Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Research Center for Advanced Materials Science (RCAMS), King Khalid University, P.O. Box 960, Abha, 61421, Saudi Arabia Ibrahim A. Shaaban Department of Biology, College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Mizan-Tepi University, Tepi, Ethiopia Dawit Kifle Authors Arshad Ali View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Azhar Abbas View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Nasir Assad View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Essam R. I. Mahmoud View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Akhtar Hayat View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Farooq Ahmad View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ibrahim A. Shaaban View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Dawit Kifle View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Arshad Ali , Azhar Abbas or Dawit Kifle . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Ali, A., Abbas, A., Assad, N. et al. A study on the synthesis and characterization of maleate-functionalized Artemisia vulgaris hydrogel for Ni(II) adsorption from groundwater: mechanism, kinetics, and reusability.
 BMC Chemistry (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13065-026-01924-9 Download citation Received : 11 July 2026 Accepted : 10 September 2026 Published : 21 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s13065-026-01924-9 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords 
 Artemisia vulgaris 
 Esterification Nickel Chemisorption Ion-exchange 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Nasir Assad 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature