Passive ecosystem services, juxtaposed with engineered processes, can democratize wastewater 
treatment 
Mathieu Lapointe1* and Chelsea M. Rochman2 
1 École de technologie supérieure – University of Québec, 1100 Notre Dame West, Montréal, QC H3C 1K3 
2 University of Toronto, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Ontario, Canada, M5S 3B2 
*Corresponding author: mathieu.lapointe@etsmtl.ca
Due to technological, economic and environmental constraints, contemporary treatment plants cannot 
treat all wastewater. In particular, the very high amount of agricultural and urban runoff to be treated 
is increasingly concerning , especially with more erratic – and unpredictable – rainfall even ts. 
Combining passive ecosystem services with engineered processes can be used to create hybrid, locally 
adapted, inexpensive, and sustainable technologies to more feasibly treat runoff and wastewater 
globally. 
Globally, an estimated 80% of wastewater is discharged into aquatic ecosystems untreated.1 The 
amount of untreated wastewater discharged in the environment is variable among economies, with 
a trend toward less treatment in lower-income economies and more treatment in higher -income 
economies. In some economies, as much as 95% of wastewater goes untreated,1 whereas in others 
the number is as little as 4%.2 The term “wastewater” can be used to include municipal and 
industrial wastewater , as well as agricultural and urban runoff. When treated, wastewater is 
generally processed using dedicated infrastructure (i.e., wastewater treatment plants) , where 
eliminated contaminants end up in a sludge that must be dewatered, landfilled, or incinerated. 
Mechanical, engineered, and closely monitored processes, such as aggregation, settling, filtration 
and disinfection, are essential to comply with government regulations that protect public health and 
aquatic ecosystems. However, wastewater treatment plants are expensive and have a considerable 
carbon and energy footprint. Moreover, wastewater treatment plants are expected to be subjected 
to great pressure owing to increasing water consumption, intensive urbanization, 
impermeabilization of cities, and erratic rainfall events associated with climate change.3,4 In most 
geographies where treatment plants exist, they are only used for municipal sewage and industrial 
wastewater, as agricultural and urban runoff are often considered to be “not contaminated enough” 
to justify the treatment cost and footprint, and therefore are not systematically treated even though 
they release several contaminants into aquatic ecosystems .5 Moreover, because ( as mentioned 
above) a large fraction of municipal and industrial wastewaters are minimally treated or not treated 
at all due primarily to high costs, the need for widely available treatment technologies has become 
urgent. 
We argue that to reduce the load on existing wastewater treatment plants and treat waters that are 
currently left untreated, more passive custom-made processes that use low-cost materials, such as 
in sit u decentralized interceptors acting as a smaller contaminant retention un it (e.g., passive 
aggregation-settling system, infiltration area, bioretention cells) should be universally adopted.6,7 
Unlike engineered and centralized water treatment plants, interceptors locally isolate contaminants 
within strategically selected environmental compartments rather than removing, accumulating, and 
concentrating them as a residue (e.g., in water treatment plant sludge). Consequently, such 
interceptors would not require sludge management (or would require minimal sludge management), 
and the contaminants would be locally sequestered and/or (bio)degraded via ecosystem services.7 
Interceptors can be strategically placed to avoid unwanted eco toxicological effects within 
vulnerable ecosystems and to protect natural waters and drinking water sources downstream. 
Authors' accepted manuscript
Article published in Nature Water volume 1, pages 308–310 (2023)
The final published version is available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s44221-023-00065-w
This version of the article has been accepted for publication, after peer review (when applicable) and is subject to Springer Nature’s AM terms of use, 
but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements, or any corrections. The Version of Record is available online at: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44221-023-00065-w
Interceptors can be a low-cost processing opti on for effectively treating agricultural and urban 
runoff, most of which enters our environment untreated today .1 As an example, passive ripa rian 
zones intercept several contaminants from agricultural runoff , such as pesticides, fertilizers, 
manure, heavy metals, salts, and pathogens.8 Combining the advantages of efficient engineered 
systems and low-cost passive interceptors, such as functionalizing soil in riparian zones (Fig. 1c 
and d) with metal (hydr)oxides to increase interactions with the most challenging contaminants 
(e.g., adsorb soluble phosphorus , organic matter, and pesticides via electrostatic affinities ) can 
enhance interception and agricultural sustainability . Other e xamples of engineered 
(eco)interceptors to limit the transport of contaminants from agricultural runoff in groundwater and 
surface water are presented in Fig. 1. 
Passive ecosystem services can be standalone water decontamination units or used as catalysts for 
engineered processes, i.e., common engineered water treatment processes could be rethought and 
reconfigured as passive (eco)interceptors to be democratized and implemented at a low cost 
globally. Biological filtration and other biodegradation processes (e.g., using specific indigenous 
and locally available microorganisms), photooxidation, photodegradation, and inactivation (e.g., 
with redirected natural UV light), aerobic oxidation (e.g., by aeration via sparging systems, Fig. 
1a), sequestration by aggregation/settling (e.g., using natural polysaccharide-based flocculants, Fig. 
1b), and adsorption on natural surfaces or functionalized soils (e.g., soil grafted with metal 
(hydr)oxides, Fig. 1c and d) could all be used as natural/ecosystem services and intensified in a 
dedicated infrastructure in situ. Passive/engineered (eco)interceptors presented in Fig. 1 are tunable 
and could consequently be adjusted to treat or partially treat several types of industrial and 
municipal wastewaters as well as urban runoff9 – not only agricultural runoff. Existing and future 
physical barriers fragmenting or rerouting rivers such as weirs, dams, urban reservoirs, sluice gates, 
channels, waterways, and culverts (> 1 ,200,000 barriers in Europe) 10 present opportunities for 
implementing (eco)interceptors (via settling, flotation , coarse screening, vortexing, infiltration, 
bioretention, etc. ), rather than being designed only for water transit or stor age. Such 
(eco)interceptors may also provide habitat for wildlife, and also restore groundwater supply – 
which is expected to reach new critical levels due to heavy pumping and climate change.11-13 In the 
near future, t his synergistic combination of natural services and engineering could provide a 
techno-economically balanced , tunable, and holistic approach democratiz ing in situ water 
decontamination for industrialized and, more importantly, developing countries. 
Smaller in situ (eco)interceptors can be strategically placed to manage localized sources of 
pollution entering fragile aquatic ecosystems and /or drinking water sou rces, for example , i) 
between a busy road and a river to retain tire wear particles and oil from cars; ii) at the intersection 
of agriculture drainage systems and rivers to trap pesticides, nutrients, and pathogens; and iii) 
around cities to retain litter, road salt or other anthropogenic stressors in untreated urban runoff.9 A 
low-cost approach via passive aggregation and settling could also be implemented by industries to 
treat wastewater from industrial processes, for example, textile and plastic manufacturers. Although 
more extensive research and a proper evaluation of the advantages (performance vs. cost) provided 
by tunable passive/engineered (eco)interceptors would be necessary, it is reasonable to expect that 
such hybrid and flexible processes could be adjusted for different wastewaters and for specific 
needs, flow rates, contaminants, and landscape. 
Clean water is critical for human health and prosperity, as well as to protect global biodiversity. 
Low-cost and sustainable (eco)interceptors – if properly engineered – could democratize water 
treatment and increase the quality of water globally. Environmental authorities must exert more 
pressure for the development and implementation of passive (eco)interceptors to accelerate 
drinking water accessibility and protect natural waters. 
 
Figure 1 │Flow pattern and examples of passive (eco)interceptors to sustainably treat agricultural runoff, in 
situ. Several contaminants coming from commercial fertilizers (P and N) , biosolids and manures used for 
agriculture are currently released in surface water and groundwater, and are accumulating in agricultural fields: 
pesticides, heavy metals, viruses, bacteria, pharmaceutical compounds, plastics debris and perfluorinated 
compounds.14,15 a, Contaminants biodegradation and oxidation/precipitation via air/O2 sparging (a1) followed 
by passive settling (a2). b, Particulate and soluble matters passive aggregation via biosourced flocculant (b1) 
followed by passive settling (b2). c, Metals injected, precipitated, and polymer-stabilized in soil to add active 
sites for soluble contaminants adsorptio n. d, Soluble contaminants adsorption on functionalized soil grains. 
Other than runoff, tunable passive/engineered (eco)interceptors could be used to (partially) treat several types 
of industrial and municipal wastewaters. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors acknowledge MJO Illustration & Design (Montreal, Canada) for figure preparation. 
 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
References 
1 Connor, R. et al. The United Nations World Water Development Report (2017). 
2 Statistics Canada. Vol. 11-627-M, Municipal wastewater systems in Canada, 2013 to 
2017 (2019). 
3 Sterling, S. M., Ducharne, A. & Polcher, J. Nature Climate Change 3, 385-390 (2013). 
4 Cooley, S. W., Ryan, J. C. & Smith, L. C. Nature 591, 78-81 (2021). 
5 UN-Habitat, W. World Health Organization (WHO), 544-565 (2021). 
6 Fenton, O. et al. The Journal of Agricultural Science 152, 71-81 (2014). 
7 Daily, G. C. & Matson, P. A. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105, 9455-
9456 (2008). 
8 Mateo-Sagasta, J., Zadeh, S. M., Turral, H. & Burke, J. Water pollution from agriculture: a 
global review. Executive summary. (2017). 
9 Lapointe, M., Rochman, C. M. & Tufenkji, N. Nature Sustainability 5, 366-369 (2022). 
10 Belletti, B. et al. Nature 588, 436-441 (2020). 
11 Famiglietti, J. S. Nature Climate Change 4, 945-948 (2014). 
12 Thaw, M., GebreEgziabher, M., Villafañe-Pagán, J. Y. & Jasechko, S. Nature 
Communications 13, 5263 (2022). 
13 Wu, W.-Y. et al. Nature Communications 11, 3710 (2020). 
14 Ghisi, R., Vamerali, T. & Manzetti, S. Environmental Research 169, 326-341 (2019). 
15 Corradini, F. et al. Science of The Total Environment 671, 411-420 (2019).