Beyond pay: how facility quality and career incentives shape rural health worker preferences in Ghana | Human Resources for Health | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Human Resources for Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beyond pay: how facility quality and career incentives shape rural health worker preferences in Ghana 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 17 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Human Resources for Health 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beyond pay: how facility quality and career incentives shape rural health worker preferences in Ghana
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Felipe Alexander Dunsch 1 & Edit Velényi 2   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 68 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Shortages and maldistribution of frontline health workers remain a major barrier to rural health service delivery in Ghana. While pay increases are often viewed as the primary lever for improving recruitment and retention, fiscal constraints have intensified interest in non-wage incentives. We conducted cadre-specific discrete choice experiments with 206 community health officers (CHOs) and 404 community health volunteers (CHVs) across eight districts in four regions to elicit preferences for job attributes. For CHOs, although higher salaries increase job attractiveness, facility quality—including reliable utilities, essential equipment, and staff accommodation—exerts the strongest influence on job choice, followed by career development opportunities and transport support; increased supervision has no measurable effect. For CHVs, facility quality is also most valued, followed by training opportunities and recognition-based incentives, whereas small stipends have comparatively limited marginal effects. Willingness-to-pay estimates and policy simulations indicate that upgrading facilities can generate larger increases in predicted job acceptance than comparable increases in compensation. These findings suggest that, beyond pay, improvements in working and living conditions and structured professional development can play a central role in multi-faceted strategies to recruit and retain rural frontline health workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assessment of interventions to attract and retain health workers in rural Zambia: a discrete choice experiment
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 03 April 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microeconomic institutions and personnel economics for health care delivery: a formal exploration of what matters to health workers in Rwanda
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 26 January 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Community Health Workers’ experiences of an intervention to provide them with increased support and supervision: a qualitative study of a home visiting model in rural South Africa
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 30 January 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Anthropology of Work 
 
 
 
 Health Policy 
 
 
 
 Third Sector Research 
 
 
 
 Health Economics 
 
 
 
 Quality of Life Research 
 
 
 
 Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 Community Health Workforce Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements The authors thank John Rose for his invaluable contributions to this paper. The authors also thank Jasper Tjaden for excellent research assistance. We further thank Edson Araujo, Aimée Miller, Jesse Heitner, and Marc Smitz for their advice and support. This research was supported by the World Bank’s Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the authors' institutions. Funding This research was supported by the World Bank’s Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). The funder had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, interpretation of results, or decision to submit the manuscript for publication. Author information Authors and Affiliations World Food Programme, Rome, Italy Felipe Alexander Dunsch World Bank, Washington, DC, USA Edit Velényi Authors Felipe Alexander Dunsch View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Edit Velényi View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Felipe Alexander Dunsch . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Ghana Health Service Ethical Review Committee. Written informed consent was obtained from all study participants prior to data collection. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Dunsch, F.A., Velényi, E. Beyond pay: how facility quality and career incentives shape rural health worker preferences in Ghana.
 Hum Resour Health (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-026-01098-4 Download citation Received : 05 January 2026 Accepted : 21 August 2026 Published : 17 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-026-01098-4 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature