The works included the study of pertinent cartographic and other historical sources, records of previous archaeological interventions and sites listed in the Historic Environment Record (HER) within 500m of the proposed development area. Relevant HER references are given in brackets throughout the text of this report, and are listed in Appendix 1. A walk-over survey was also conducted, to help ascertain the potential of the proposed development area to contain any archaeological resource. Pro forma recording sheets were completed. There is no direct evidence for prehistoric or Roman activity within the proposed development area. Despite the presence of prehistoric activity on higher ground in the immediate vicinity and the nearby route of the Devil's Causeway Roman road, the floodplain would not have been used for settlement during these periods, and it considered unlikely that any evidence of transient activity during these periods would be encountered. The site was floodplain associated with the River Breamish in the medieval period, with some areas used for agriculture, pasture and moorland. The land surrounding the river became more agricultural into the post-medieval period, and earthworks of post-medieval ridge and furrow cultivation survive within part of the site; below-ground evidence of this may also survive across a wider area. Historic mapping charts the various changes to the route of the river in detail from the mid-19th century onwards. The remains of the late 19th-century Beanley Tile Works may survive within the site, though this does not lie within an area of proposed groundworks. A late 19th-century rifle range was located near the centre of the site, though there is unlikely to be an archaeological resource associated with this. The most significant activity in the 20th century was gravel extraction in the southern part of the site. This will have removed any archaeological resource in this area. The creation of the lakes in the centre of the site in the 21st century was subject to archaeological works, which did not record any archaeological resource earlier than post-medieval cultivation. Groundworks associated with the proposed development are limited and will be restricted to specific locations. Some of the proposed access routes utilise pre-existing tracks and paths, though other cross through fields and scrubland. In most cases, groundwork locations do not correspond with any known archaeological resource within the site boundary. There is some limited potential for the groundworks to impact upon an as yet unidentified archaeological resource. A proposed chute channel is located in a field of ridge and furrow earthworks near the centre of the site. The proposed works would remove the earthworks in the location of the chute channel and its immediate vicinity but the majority of the field would be unaffected by the works. These remains are post-medieval in date and are of limited archaeological significance. It is recommen