Comparative advantages of three-crop systems in improving crop nutrient accumulation and soil fertility in Sichuan Hilly agroecosystems, China | Chemical and Biological Technologies in Agriculture | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chemical and Biological Technologies in Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Comparative advantages of three-crop systems in improving crop nutrient accumulation and soil fertility in Sichuan Hilly agroecosystems, China 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 08 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chemical and Biological Technologies in Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Comparative advantages of three-crop systems in improving crop nutrient accumulation and soil fertility in Sichuan Hilly agroecosystems, China
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dexiang Sun 1 , Hao Yang 1 , Mingfu Shi 2 , Kejun Wan 1 , Xue Wan 1 , Lan Gao 1 , Xin Song 1 , Honggen Xu 1 , Hong Wang 1 , Ruoqi Pu 1 , Dinghui Liu 1 & … Shanghong Chen 1   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 39 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background The expansion of mechanized agriculture has accelerated the adoption of double-cropping systems in dryland regions, leading to a decline in the traditional three‑crop rotation system in the hilly arid areas of Sichuan. In its place, two‑crop rotations-specifically winter wheat–summer corn and winter rapeseed-summer corn-have gradually become more prevalent, resulting in a coexistence of both three-crop and two‑crop systems. Understanding the nutrient utilization patterns associated with these typical cropping systems in Sichuan’s hilly arid zones can offer a theoretical foundation for optimizing crop rotation and optimizing cropping structures in the hilly regions of southwestern China. Methods This study was based on a three‑year field experiment conducted from 2021 to 2024, in which five cropping systems were established: winter wheat-spring corn-sweet potato (T1), winter wheat-spring corn-soybean (T2), potato-spring corn-soybean (T3), winter wheat-summer corn (T4), and winter rapeseed-summer corn (T5). For each cropping system, we measured crop biomass, nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) uptake, soil nutrient dynamics, and partial factor productivity of fertilizer (PFPF). Results The results showed that the three‑crop rotation systems exhibited significantly higher average annual biomass and N, P, and K uptake than the two-crop systems, with the winter wheat-spring corn-sweet potato rotation producing the highest average annual biomass among all treatments. In the three‑crop systems, fertilizer-to-productivity ratios increased, whereas soil N, P, and K levels declined, and partial factor productivity of fertilizer efficiency improved. These findings indicate that the three‑crop rotation system enhances nutrient acquisition and utilization, thereby laying a foundation for yield improvement. Conclusions Compared with two-crop rotations, the three‑crop system exhibited greater soil nutrient uptake (including N, P, and K), higher biomass accumulation, and improved partial factor productivity of fertilizer. Among the five cropping patterns tested, the winter wheat-spring corn-sweet potato rotation performed the best and is therefore recommended for adoption in the hilly arid regions of the study area. Graphical abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How do three-crop systems improve nutrient uptake compared to two-crop systems? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What are the impacts of crop rotation systems on soil fertility and productivity? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crop rotation and succession in soybean production systems: cover crop biomass, grain yield and revenue
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 25 September 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modeling Long-Term Crop Yield, Soil Organic Carbon, and Rootzone Hydrologic Dynamics Under Different Tillage and Cropping Systems in Ohio, USA
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 25 June 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Crop rotation with Species Diversification During Off-season Impact the Nutrient Cycling in No-tillage System
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 28 May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Crop waste 
 
 
 
 Subsistence Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Agronomy 
 
 
 
 Agricultural Geography 
 
 
 
 Organic Farming 
 
 
 
 Climate-Resilient Crop Production Systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements We sincerely thank all the staff and students in the Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences for their assistance with fieldwork. Funding This research was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program (2023YFD1900300) and the ‘1 + 3’ Seed Source Core Technology Breakthrough Project (2025 (1 + 3) ZYGG-04-4) for study design, methodological development, and data analysis. The Sichuan Corn Innovation Team Project of the National Modern Agricultural Industrial Technology System (sc-cxtd-2024-02) provided additional support for field trial implementation and sample collection. Author information Authors and Affiliations Institute of Agricultural Resources and Environment, Sichuan Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Key Laboratory of Agricultural Environment in Southwest Mountainous Areas, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Chengdu, 610006, Sichuan, China Dexiang Sun, Hao Yang, Kejun Wan, Xue Wan, Lan Gao, Xin Song, Honggen Xu, Hong Wang, Ruoqi Pu, Dinghui Liu & Shanghong Chen Department of Agriculture, Forestry, and Food Engineering, Yibin University, Yibin, 644000, Sichuan, China Mingfu Shi Authors Dexiang Sun View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Hao Yang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Mingfu Shi View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Kejun Wan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xue Wan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lan Gao View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xin Song View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Honggen Xu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Hong Wang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ruoqi Pu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Dinghui Liu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Shanghong Chen View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Shanghong Chen . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 All co-authors have seen and agreed on the contents of the manuscript, and there is no financial interest to report. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Sun, D., Yang, H., Shi, M. et al. Comparative advantages of three-crop systems in improving crop nutrient accumulation and soil fertility in Sichuan Hilly agroecosystems, China.
 Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric. (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40538-026-01079-8 Download citation Received : 04 March 2026 Accepted : 28 August 2026 Published : 08 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s40538-026-01079-8 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Crop rotation systems Crop nutrients Soil nutrients Three-crop intercropping system Two-crop rotation system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How do three-crop systems improve nutrient uptake compared to two-crop systems? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What are the impacts of crop rotation systems on soil fertility and productivity? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature