Optimization of nitrogen source ratios for somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii | BMC Plant Biology | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Optimization of nitrogen source ratios for somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 15 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Optimization of nitrogen source ratios for somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lin Xu 1 , 2 , 3   na1 , Qian Liu 1 , 2 , 3   na1 , Qiang Du 1 , 2 , 3 , Zhaolei Deng 1 , 2 , 3 , Wei Ding 1 , 2 , 3 , Qifu Luan 4 & … Chunxia Yang 1 , 2 , 3   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 38 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Somatic embryogenesis represents a critical biotechnology platform for large-scale propagation and germplasm conservation of Pinus elliottii . However, low maturation efficiency remains a major limitation for commercial application. This study systematically investigated the regulatory effects of nitrogen source ratios on somatic embryo maturation in slash pine. Embryogenic callus [Ca(NO₃)₂, Asn, CH, Gln, and Pro], followed by optimization of nitrogen combinations based on an L₁₈(3⁵) orthogonal experimental design. Results indicated that Medium No. 14 was most conducive to the formation of total embryos of both S7-5 and S24-1, and to S7-2 cotyledonary embryo formation; Medium No. 11 proved optimal for total embryos of S7-2 and differentiation of S24-1 cotyledonary embryos; whereas Medium No. 13 was most favorable for S7-5 cotyledonary embryo formation. Correlation analysis revealed significant promoting effects of Ca(NO₃)₂ and Gln on embryo maturation. Enzymatic activity assays indicated that the optimized nitrogen ratio significantly upregulated GS activity while downregulating NR and NiR activities, facilitating the assimilation of nitrogen into organic forms. This study established an nitrogen regulatory system for slash pine somatic embryo maturation and elucidated the regulatory mechanisms of key nitrogen metabolic enzymes in conifer embryogenesis, thereby providing theoretical foundations and technical support for large-scale breeding and genetic improvement of superior slash pine varieties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How do nitrogen source ratios affect somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What are the regulatory mechanisms of nitrogen metabolism in conifer embryogenesis? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nitrogen utilization during germination of somatic embryos of Norway spruce: revealing the importance of supplied glutamine for nitrogen metabolism
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 09 November 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The source, level, and balance of nitrogen during the somatic embryogenesis process drive cellular differentiation
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 11 November 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Long term proliferation and physiological response of embryogenic callus in Slash pine ( Pinus Elliottii Engelm)
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 01 July 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Embryonic Induction 
 
 
 
 Plant regeneration 
 
 
 
 Plant Development 
 
 
 
 Plant Embryogenesis 
 
 
 
 Seed development 
 
 
 
 Plant Biotechnology 
 
 
 
 Somatic Embryogenesis in Plant Tissue Culture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 32160389), and Biological Breeding-Major Projects (Grant No. 2023ZD04058), and Jiangxi Academy of Forestry Sciences Basic Research Project - Leading Talent (2025522903), and Basic Research and Talent Research Special Project of Jiangxi Academy of Forestry Sciences (2023522903). Author information Author notes Lin Xu and Qian Liu contributed equally to this work. Authors and Affiliations Jiangxi Academy of Forestry, Nanchang, 330013, China Lin Xu, Qian Liu, Qiang Du, Zhaolei Deng, Wei Ding & Chunxia Yang Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Improved Variety Breeding and Efficient Utilization of Native Tree Spe-cies, Nanchang, 330013, China Lin Xu, Qian Liu, Qiang Du, Zhaolei Deng, Wei Ding & Chunxia Yang Nanchang Key Laboratory of Biological Breeding of Special Spice Trees Species, Nanchang, 330013, China Lin Xu, Qian Liu, Qiang Du, Zhaolei Deng, Wei Ding & Chunxia Yang Research Institute of Subtropical Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Hangzhou, 311400, China Qifu Luan Authors Lin Xu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Qian Liu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Qiang Du View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Zhaolei Deng View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Wei Ding View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Qifu Luan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Chunxia Yang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Chunxia Yang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Supplementary Material 1. (download XLSX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Xu, L., Liu, Q., Du, Q. et al. Optimization of nitrogen source ratios for somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii .
 BMC Plant Biol (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09765-3 Download citation Received : 11 March 2026 Accepted : 12 August 2026 Published : 15 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09765-3 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords 
 Pinus elliottii 
 Somatic embryogenesis Nitrogen source optimization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How do nitrogen source ratios affect somatic embryo maturation in Pinus elliottii? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What are the regulatory mechanisms of nitrogen metabolism in conifer embryogenesis? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature