Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a top public health threat globally, claiming the lives of over 1,27 million people annually (Kapatsa et al. 2026). It particularly affects low income countries. Africa has the world's largest mortality rate from AMR infections, which are responsible for 27 death cases per 100 000 inhabitants (Kapatsa et al. 2026). There are estimations that it will progress to 10 million death cases annually by 2050, if no measures are undertaken Kapatsa et al. 2026). Multidrug (MDR) and extensively-drug resistant (XDR) phenotype are frequently encountered among hospital pathogens, but lately also in the community setting. The spread of MDR bacteria is associated with additional costs and higher morbidity and mortality rates (Pendleton et al. 2013). Developing countries in Africa and Asia and some European countries located in Southeastern Europe have very high antibiotic resistance rates, particularly high rate of ESBL and carbapenemase positivity among Enterobacterales. This could in part be due to lack of adequate routine microbiology diagnostic which should identify resistance traits phenotypically and using new molecular methods. Lack of staff education and resources limits the possibility for early detection which consequently enables the spread of these bad bugs. In developed countries new molecular genotyping methods such as rep-PCR, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, multilocus-sequence typing and next generation sequencing enable rapid and accurate tracing of multidrug-resistant bacteria and prevention of large hospital outbreaks. Moreover, lapses in antibiotic prescription control, hospital hygiene and surveillance and overcrowded hospital units contribute to the spread of resistant bacteria in developing countries. The poor sanitary conditions of rural and urban families observed in certain regions in Africa and Asia may favour the transmission of bacterial infections between animals and humans, including those promoted by strains resistant to practically all available antibiotics (Toolkit et al. 2019). CTX-M-15 which is now a dominant extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) type all over the world originated from India in the early 2000-ties. In 2008 the first case of NDM metallo-β-lactamase was reported in Sweden, but in patient previously hospitalized in India. For a long time, the majority of NDM isolates in Europe were imported from India, Pakistan or North Africa. The data reported so far emphasise the need for One Health approach in dealing with antimicrobial resistance, in order to cope resistant bacteria. Global inequities in the AMR burden between and within populations, are affected by the social and structural factors. Low and middle income countries experience up to 90% of total deaths from infections with resistant bacteria, high rates of infectious diseases, problems in access to healthcare and limited supply of antimicrobials (Davis et al. 2025). It is estimated that 25000 deaths in Africa are attributabl