A DEMATEL–AHP-based suitability assessment framework for geothermal water extraction from low- to medium-temperature sedimentary-basin resources: a case study of Lindian County, China | Geomechanics and Geophysics for Geo-Energy and Geo-Resources | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geomechanics and Geophysics for Geo-Energy and Geo-Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 A DEMATEL–AHP-based suitability assessment framework for geothermal water extraction from low- to medium-temperature sedimentary-basin resources: a case study of Lindian County, China 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 19 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geomechanics and Geophysics for Geo-Energy and Geo-Resources 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A DEMATEL–AHP-based suitability assessment framework for geothermal water extraction from low- to medium-temperature sedimentary-basin resources: a case study of Lindian County, China
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ye Tian 1 , 2 , Ge Zhang  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0000-1977-2068 1 , 2 , Zijie Sang 2 , Yuxiu Chen 2 & … Feiyang Yan 2   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Existing assessments of geothermal water extraction suitability in sedimentary basins are often limited by subjective indicator selection, insufficient consideration of inter-indicator relationships, and weak adaptability to low- to medium-temperature geothermal systems. Taking Lindian County, a representative geothermal field in the northern Songnen Plain, as a case study, this work develops a process-based assessment framework integrating spatial zoning, key-factor identification, indicator quantification, and weighted evaluation. The study area was divided into 16 sub-regions using dominant-factor zoning and GIS-based overlay analysis. Five core driving indicators were then identified from 20 candidate indicators using DEMATEL, and their weights were determined using AHP after passing the consistency test. A four-level scoring scheme was established, and the linear weighted-sum method was used to generate quantitative suitability scores and spatial zoning maps. The results indicate that Lindian County has generally favorable conditions for geothermal water extraction, although clear spatial heterogeneity exists among the sub-regions. Overall, 87.5% of the sub-regions were classified as having good or relatively good suitability. WAI and WDI were identified as the optimal zones, whereas KAII and BEII showed relatively poor suitability. The spatial pattern supports the interpretation that geological structure controls both reservoir development and geothermal fluid occurrence, with hydrochemical properties and reservoir water-richness acting as secondary controlling factors. The proposed framework improves the transparency of indicator selection and provides a practical basis for zoning-based geothermal water extraction planning in similar sedimentary basins. Highlights 
 
 The DEMATEL method is used to reveal the causal and interaction relationships among evaluation indicators, accurately identify the core driving factors, and eliminate the subjectivity in indicator selection. Construct a full - process evaluation framework to achieve a breakthrough from qualitative description to quantitative evaluation, and from single - factor analysis to multi - factor coupling, which is suitable for the core characteristics of sedimentary - basin - type medium - low - temperature geothermal resources. Taking Lindian County as a case to implement the model, differentiate development areas, and provide a replicable technical paradigm and practical reference for the development of similar geothermal resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Geology and Development of Geothermal Field in Bao-Quanling Formation in Fangzheng County
 
 
 
 Chapter 
 
 © 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Using geographic information methodology to identify aquifer recharge
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 25 April 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Integrating conventional and remote sensing with DC resistivity datasets to map groundwater potential areas using the analytical hierarchy process method, North Wadi Diit, Egypt
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 14 April 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Energy Access 
 
 
 
 Legal Geography 
 
 
 
 Regional Geography 
 
 
 
 Geotechnical Engineering and Applied Earth Sciences 
 
 
 
 Geographical Information System 
 
 
 
 Geoinformatics 
 
 
 
 Geothermal Energy Exploration Using Magnetic Anomaly Data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the College of Water Resources and Electricity of Heilongjiang University and Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province. Funding Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province, PL2025D022. Author information Authors and Affiliations Engineering Research Center of Agricultural Microbiology Technology, Ministry of Education, Heilongjiang University, No.74 Xuefu Road, Nangang District, Harbin City, 150500, Heilongjiang Province, China Ye Tian & Ge Zhang School of Hydraulic and Electric Power, Heilongjiang University, Harbin, 150080, China Ye Tian, Ge Zhang, Zijie Sang, Yuxiu Chen & Feiyang Yan Authors Ye Tian View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ge Zhang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Zijie Sang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yuxiu Chen View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Feiyang Yan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Ge Zhang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interest. 
 
 Additional information Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Tian, Y., Zhang, G., Sang, Z. et al. A DEMATEL–AHP-based suitability assessment framework for geothermal water extraction from low- to medium-temperature sedimentary-basin resources: a case study of Lindian County, China.
 Geomech. Geophys. Geo-energ. Geo-resour. (2026). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40948-026-01247-y Download citation Received : 12 May 2026 Accepted : 09 September 2026 Published : 19 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s40948-026-01247-y Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Sedimentary basin Low- to medium-temperature geothermal resources Geothermal water extraction suitability DEMATEL AHP Lindian County 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Ge Zhang 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature