Surface waters are the primary drinking water sources for the Greater Sydney region, typically treated using coagulation/sedimentation followed by rapid sand filtration. High dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration can lead to undesirable colour, odour, taste, bacterial regrowth, acceleration of disinfectant decay, and the formation of disinfection by-products (DBPs) in drinking water supply systems, which pose risks to human health. High true colour is often positively correlated to DOC. This dissertation investigates the ongoing trends of DOC and true colour, implications, and potential solutions for improving current drinking water treatment performance under future climate extremes. A global literature review revealed that long-term trends in DOC or water colour have been widely studied in Europe and North America, while such studies remain limited in Australian drinking water catchments. About half of the 1,640 waters studied exhibited significant increases, with climate extremes identified as the primary driver. Methodologically, most studies detected monotonic trends, which present limitations in capturing the dynamic nature of DOC in rivers. Current drinking water treatment methods struggle to manage high DOC raw water, and thus, this review proposes alternative solutions such as catchment interventions, buffer storage, and frontline treatments. Since true colour or DOC increases in some Greater Sydney drinking water reservoirs, a treatment option was investigated under laboratory-scale batch reactor experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of suspended biologically activated carbon frontline treatment. The treatment focused on DOC reduction and characterisation using LCOCD/OND. Five reactors, each having one day retention time connected in series were operated. All reactors contained 2% v/v suspended biological activated carbon. Overall, the reactors reduced raw water DOC by 62- 77%. Collectively, the findings of this research are expected to assist water utilities in meeting regulatory drinking water quality standards at customer taps by integrating catchment-specific DOC or true colour changes and frontline treatment strategies.