Int J Environ Sci Nat Res 32(1): IJESNR.MS.ID.556329 (2023)
 01
The Impact of Renewable Energy on 
Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example
Conceptual Paper
Volume 32 Issue 1 - April 2023
DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330
Int J Environ Sci Nat Res
 Copyright © All rights are reserved by Zhaobin LI
Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI*
Hong Kong Metropolitan University, Hong Kong
Submission: March 28, 2023; Published: May 01, 2023
*Corresponding author: Zhaobin LI, Hong Kong Metropolitan University, Homantin Kowloon, Hong Kong 
Abstract
Renewable energy has significant advantages over traditional energy sources. It is often called “environmentally friendly green energy” , 
which is considered to be free of environmental pollution and disruption. However, the process of its development and utilization needs human 
interventions, which is a long-term and complicated systemic project. From the renewable energy supply upstream and downstream industry 
chain, zero carbon emissions and zero pollution cannot be achieved. There are high pollution costs and ecological damage risks. The front-runner 
of renewable energy is photovoltaic power generation. It is smaller than the traditional fossil energy generation for the environment. To achieve 
photovoltaic power generation, a huge photovoltaic industry chain is needed to do support. According to the IEA (International Energy Agency) 
report, 80% of the global solar photovoltaic industry manufacturing is concentrated in China. The electricity used by the industry manufacturing, 
the carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere, and the three wastes (wastewater, gas, and sludge) generated during the manufacturing process 
become the environmental problems that China needs to eliminate as a production supplier.
Keywords: Renewable energy; Photovoltaic power generation; Photovoltaic industry chain; Environmental protection; Photovoltaic future
Introduction
At present, the momentum of China’s economic take-off is 
unstoppable, and a stable and environmentally friendly energy 
supply is the basic guarantee for economic development. Being 
different from China’s long-term reliance on fossil energy 
such as coal and oil, which has led to resource depletion, 
environmental degradation and climate change, renewable 
energy is environmentally friendly, green and sustainable. 2021’s 
authoritative United Nations Climate Conference has once again 
released the idea that building renewable energy facilities is an 
important step in reducing carbon emissions globally in the future. 
This has conceptual commonalities with China’s announcement 
in October 2021 that carbon should be “peaked in 30 years” 
and “neutralised in 60 years” , which is an important historical 
strategy to create a green, low-carbon and recyclable economic 
development system and to expand the proportion of renewable 
energy supply and consumption. It is the concept of creating 
a green, low-carbon and recyclable economic development 
system, increasing the proportion of renewable energy supply 
and consumption, reducing carbon emissions and enhancing 
the sustainability of the ecosystem. The use of renewable energy 
for power generation has become a major trend and a choice for 
human development.
Background and significance of the study
“The sun is the source of energy for the growth of all things” , 
and some scholars say that the sun has been used for 4.6 billion 
years and still has 5 billion years to continue supplying energy. 
All the environments on which humans have depended for so 
long, including the fossil energy, are formed by direct or indirect 
conversion of solar energy. In the middle of the last century, 
photovoltaic cells were first developed using monocrystalline 
silicon at the Bell Research Institute in the USA, ushering in a 
new era of solar power generation for human energy. These 
photovoltaic cells are arranged in series to form a large-area 
matrix, which forms a power station together with controllers, 
inverters and other auxiliary materials. These power stations are 
long-lasting, clean and safe, environmentally friendly and energy-
saving, and do not require a lot of follow-up maintenance work. 
If they can be put at the service of mankind, the newly developed 
solar photovoltaic power generation will undoubtedly bring new 
expectations to mankind against the background of a series of 
environmental problems caused by the exploitation of traditional 
fossil energy sources.
With the rapid development of the photovoltaic industry in 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633002
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
more than half a century, two modes of expression have been 
formed in its downstream power stations. One is centralised 
photovoltaic power stations, which are mainly built in deserts, 
Gobi and other areas where ecological resources are scarce and 
the environment is not suitable for human habitation; the other is 
decentralised photovoltaic, which is mainly built on the roof of the 
buildings, the top of the plant, the top of the vegetable shed, above 
reservoirs or fish ponds and other small areas that can be fully 
utilized. In general, photovoltaic power stations are not limited in 
size, and they are flexible in installation, safe in operation, easy to 
maintain, large in space utilisation, and friendly in harmony with 
the environment.
The carbon emissions from photovoltaic power generation are 
far from those of traditional fossil energy sources, reaching only 
about 10-20%, and will be a strong grip for China to achieve its 
dual carbon targets in the future. Over the past decade or so, our 
country’s photovoltaic industry has taken an incomparable path 
in cost control, with costs dropping to 90% of previous levels. In 
the local 14th Five-Year Plan, several cities clearly indicated that 
vigorously expand photovoltaic production capacity and increase 
the construction and investment of photovoltaic sites, especially 
in coastal cities such as Zhejiang, Jiangsu and other regions 
walking in the front of industrial research and development. 
According to the estimation of research institutions under the 
China Development and Reform Commission, the installed 
capacity will be expanded by at least half in 25 years, and 40% 
of domestic power will come from photovoltaic power generation 
in 50 years. Looking forward, the future of photovoltaics is 
good. However, an economy that moves forward too blindly is 
vulnerable to environmental repercussions. History has taught 
us that economic development must be safe and environmentally 
friendly. It is the ultimate goal for mankind to live in harmony with 
nature, to share the environment and to build ecological diversity 
and sustainability.
As the PV industry continues to expand, and the amount of 
equipment and facilities it owns increases, we need to understand 
and analyse the role and impact of PV on environmental protection. 
From the source to the end of the industry, we need to recognize 
the weaknesses in environmental protection and identify the 
bright spots. We will use a rational and scientific approach to 
guide the photovoltaic industry to avoid environmental risks 
and to improve the extensive and sustainable contribution of 
photovoltaics to environmental protection.
Current status of domestic and international research on 
renewable energy
Current status of foreign research on renewable energy
EU: Germany, with the largest population coefficient in the EU, 
for example, has relatively leading renewable energy generation 
technology and development concept of environmental 
protection. In Germany, as the use rate of land resources is high, 
photovoltaic is mainly distributed power generation, which is 
widely used on building roofs. Wind power is mainly arranged in 
the hills and some areas near the coastline, and biomass power 
generation mainly exists in rural areas in the form of biogas power 
generation and biomass burning power generation. In the first 
half of 2022, these new sources of energy provided nearly 50% 
of Germany’s electricity. In recent years, Germany has revised 
the Renewable Energy Act five times, and the requirements for 
the share of renewable energy power generation are increasing 
each time. The latest amendment proposes that it aims to reach 
65% of the electricity generated in 2035 and reach 80% of the 
electricity supplied by renewable energy in 2050. Germany has a 
high self-sufficiency and wide distribution of renewable energy, 
which has led to the orderly development of local industries and 
the environment.
UK: The UK is at the forefront of renewable energy technologies 
and applications and is a country with a very rich offshore wind 
industry. The UK authorities announced that in 2020, the UK’s 
annual renewable energy generation was higher than fossil energy 
for the first time, with a 43.1% share of electricity generation. By 
the end of 2021, the UK has been the largest country in Europe 
with 12.7GW of offshore wind energy on the grid. Besides, a 
UK power analysis company said that renewables will be the 
main source of electricity generation in the future. The UK BEIS 
(Department of Energy and Industrial Planning) has stated that 
in 2021, renewable energy generation will be 121.9TWh, which 
is indeed 9.5% lower than that of in 2020 due to the impact of 
the epidemic and the weather. However, 2021 is still the second 
highest in the UK in terms of renewable energy development over 
the years.
The US: The US Energy Agency announced that 20 percent 
of its electricity production in 2021 would come from renewable 
sources, amounting to 8,000TWh. The country’s future plans are 
to increase the share of wind and solar power in the long term and 
to promote the rapid development of renewable energy in order to 
reduce its dependence on fossil energy. Solar power, in particular, 
will become the main force of renewable energy generation in the 
future. Renewable energy has been better practiced and used in 
the United States, and environmental pollution and damage to the 
atmosphere have improved with the development of renewable 
energy.
The development status of renewable energy in China
I. Development stage
a) From 1949 to 1994, China mainly focused on biogas and 
hydroelectric power generation, and less on other renewable 
energy sources for gradual and independent innovation. 
During this period, the hydropower industry developed 
rapidly. By the end of the 1970s, China was mainly developing 
hydropower, and the whole storage capacity had reached 
about 19 million KW, with an annual production of nearly 50 
billion KW/H.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633003
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
b) 1995-2007, from technology imitation to innovative 
transition stage. At this time China began to pay attention to 
the development of energy systems about wind, geothermal, 
solar and other work. Due to the late start, lack of experience, 
and relevant legal policies in a blank state, there is a certain 
gap between China’s renewable energy technology and that 
of foreign countries. In response to the development needs, 
China implemented the Law of the People’s Republic of China 
on Energy Conservation in 1998 and the Law of the People’s 
Republic of China on Renewable Energy in 2006. At the same 
time, it began to refine various plans, aiming to improve the 
relevant objectives and tasks.
c) Before 2012, China’s annual wind and solar power 
generation accounted for less than 20% of the country’s new 
electricity consumption. However, after 2012, renewable 
energy generation continued to increase. In 2014, China’s 
wind and solar power generation exceeded the newly 
increased electricity consumption for the first time, and its 
installed capacity ranked first in the world. In the same year, 
great breakthroughs were made in photovoltaic and biomass 
power generation. At this time, China is mainly in the creative 
imitation stage. While developing, it also adjusts and optimizes 
all aspects, and gradually attaches importance to independent 
innovation.
II. Development status
In September 2021, the country announced its “double carbon 
target” strategy, which indicates that by 2025, the proportion 
of renewable energy generation will reach about one-fifth of 
consumption. In June 2021, a notice on feed-in tariffs was issued, 
which also mentions that from 2021 onwards, new renewable 
energy generation projects can be built on a voluntary basis and 
enter the market. It better demonstrates the value of photovoltaic 
as green power. Similar policies, regulations and development 
objectives are aimed at achieving a more comprehensive reduction 
in dependence on traditional energy sources, increasing the use 
of sustainable electricity generation, reducing CO2 emissions and 
achieving truly sustainable development.
As can be seen from (Figure 1), from 2016 to 2021, China’s 
power generation and installed capacity in the field of renewable 
energy showed a continuous upward trend, and the average 
growth rate was above 10%. Among them, installed capacity of 
renewable energy power generation in China has exceeded 1 
billion KW last year, accounting for about 25% of the total reserves 
of power generation units, an increase of nearly 14% from the 
previous month. In 2021, renewable energy sector of China will 
generate about 2480 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity, an 
increase of about 12% year-on-year, accounting for 30% of the 
total social electricity consumption.
Figure 1: China’s renewable energy generation data for the last 6 years.
At present, there are four main types of renewable energy 
generation in China, involving wind, light, water and biomass. 
From the aspect of (Figure 2), regarding the proportion of installed 
scale and the proportion of power generation, the whole scale 
of wind power generation, photovoltaic power production and 
water power generation respectively accounted for about 30% of 
the total scale last year. Besides, its power generation obviously 
accounted for more than half of the total power generation, and 
the remaining three types of renewable energy have more room 
for growth.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633004
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Figure 2: Data of four renewable energy sources in 2021.
Development of the photovoltaic power generation industry
Development stages of the photovoltaic industry in the 
world
From a global perspective, the photovoltaic industry was 
mainly affected by the penetration of technology in the European 
region, led by Germany in the beginning, and mainly showed four 
stages of development.
1. The period of high growth and development from 2005 
to 2010, when the global market for the PV industry was 
dominated by Europe.
2. From 2011 to 2012, when the global PV industry entered 
a brief downturn, experiencing overcapacity, trade frictions, 
the European debt and financial crisis.
3. From 2013 to 2017, during the rising period of emerging 
markets, China was an outstanding representative of the 
emerging market. The PV industry in the world once again 
stepped into a more rapid development track. PV power 
plant investment continued to increase, and the new installed 
capacity doubled year after year.
4. In the same year, China introduced the “531 New Deal” 
and the “Notice on Matters Relating to Photovoltaic Power 
Generation in 2018” , which were the policies of mainland 
China. The global photovoltaic industry began to usher in the 
most affordable era since the Internet, China’s photovoltaic 
installation in the global scale was still maintained at a high 
new scale.
Development stage and current situation of domestic PV 
industry
a) The development stage of the PV industry in China
The PV industry started late in China, with a total development 
time of less than 20 years. It has gone through 3 important stages 
in China.
1. The initial stage is before 2007. The photovoltaic 
industry in China was mainly driven by policy at this stage. 
For example, in 2001, the Bright Project was launched in the 
hope of using renewable energy to solve the painful problem 
of remote areas without access to electricity. As the scale was 
restricted and the market was not available, the construction 
of the PV industry in China was relatively slow at this stage.
2. From 2007 to 2013, it was in the stage of curve 
development, and the growth of PV installation fluctuated. 
In order to make a clear statement on the tariff subsidies 
for reproducible electricity, the country introduced the 
“renewable energy tariff additional subsidies and quota 
trading program notice” , so that the investment enthusiasm 
of PV industry chain enterprises was greatly enhanced. From 
2009 to 2010, in order to promote the healthy development of 
the polysilicon industry, the state launched the “PV building 
application” benchmark project, and issued the “Notice on the 
Suppression of Overcapacity in Some Industries and the Quota 
Trading Scheme” , hoping to guide the domestic PV industry to 
adapt to the market development more quickly. 
3. After 2014, it was in the steady growth phase. Electricity 
subsidies and filing systems have boosted the investment 
enthusiasm.The country has also set up PV poverty alleviation 
plans and implemented runner-up projects, allowing the PV 
industry to step into high gear, with annual growth rates 
remaining at around 25%. Since then, the photovoltaic power 
generation industry has officially entered a period of stable 
development.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633005
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
b) The current situation of China’s photovoltaic industry 
development
At present, China’s photovoltaic technology is improving 
at a high speed. The cost of photovoltaic electricity production 
is gradually reduced, while the power trade has more market-
oriented advantages, which is predicted in the “Fourteenth 
Five Year Plan” . And photovoltaic machine storage in China will 
continue to heat up. Throughout the entire energy structure of 
China, photovoltaic power generation will gradually increase. 
According to PV industry scholars, in the current normal industry 
development trend,, China’s PV industry can reach 110GW of 
new installed capacity by 2025, with a large growth space. From 
2018 to 2020, the global CAGR (compound annual growth rate) 
of installed industry shipments was 25.8%, and China reached 
20.5%. Driven by policy, China has begun to develop distributed 
PV in recent years, which is different from centralized PV power 
stations in the past. It can be seen from (Figure 3) that distributed 
household PV has gradually become a new force for PV 
development in recent years. Especially in 2021, China announced 
the policy of “promoting the development of distributed PV in the 
whole county” . It is estimated that the average annual distributed 
PV will enjoy rapid development during the 14th Five-Year Plan 
period.
Figure 3: Installed scale of household PV in China (GW).
According to China’s relevant planning requirements, the 
PV industry will also be vigorously developed in a centralized 
manner. During the “14th Five-Year Plan” period, as a new energy 
source, PV has a large window of opportunity, and the national 
strategic positioning is high quality, high proportion, market-
oriented and large-scale. Large-scale centralised PV projects will 
be built in Gobi, desert, and desert areas.
China’s domestic efforts to break through the technology of the 
PV industry chain, the gradual reduction in the cost of electricity 
generation and the initial clarification of the national tariff have 
led to a booming trend in the development of PV industry. Data 
from (Figure 4) shows that China reached 306 million kilowatts of 
PV power generation capacity last year, four times more than the 
2016 capacity; By 2021 the capacity reached 325.9 billion watt-
hours, seven times that of 2016.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633006
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Figure 4: Installed PV capacity and electricity generation.
Analysis of the Environmental Impact of Pollution 
from the Photovoltaic Industry
Since 2013, the country has been vigorously promoting 
energy conservation and emission reduction and has rapidly 
increased the development speed of the photovoltaic industry. 
By 2017, China’s domestic PV production and storage capacity 
have exceeded that of the European Union. The photovoltaic 
industry chain is also being gradually upgraded and optimised. 
The production of photovoltaic panels has four important links, 
including silicon production and processing, silicon wafer 
production and photovoltaic cell production. For the first time, 
it surpassed Japan. Due to its technological and production 
advantages, the cost of photovoltaic power generation has fallen 
by more than 90% over the past decade, and China’s Development 
and Reform Commission predicts that by the year of 2050 , 
nearly 40% of social electricity consumption will be supplied by 
photovoltaic power generation. China is currently the world’s 
premier and largest PV equipment manufacturing hub, and the 
upstream, midstream and downstream chains of the PV industry 
are all in place, with each link being a participant in PV power 
generation and expecting the industry to create economic value 
on a stable basis. However, each link also needs to pay attention to 
environmental issues to meet environmental requirements, so as 
to achieve sustainable development of the industry and long-term 
economic development efficiency. This group starts its analysis 
from the silicon wafers at the front end of the PV industry, and 
then returns to the recycling of solid waste at the end. As the 
industry chain is really long and involves a wide range of contents, 
this group has selected the most representative links to make in-
depth analysis and research, in an effort to understand the impact 
of industrial development on ecological links and polish the 
contents of this chapter to warn others.
Pollution focuses of battery production in PV industry
Photovoltaic power generation is still most dominated by 
photovoltaic cells, which are usually made with silicon as the 
substrate. Because of the relatively high energy conversion rate, 
cost advantages, long service life and other characteristics, the 
market produces more monocrystalline silicon or polycrystalline 
silicon photovoltaic cells. In the original development process, 
polysilicon was used in the highest proportion. From silicon to the 
manufacturing process of crystalline silicon panels, there are the 
following important pollution links. 
Silicon processing link
The primary raw material used in photovoltaic cells is ore 
from nature. From the (Figure 5), we know that silica is the 
most important raw material for the whole photovoltaic power 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633007
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
generation industry. After high temperature smelting, purification 
and a series of complex chemical and physical operations, 
crystalline silicon with high purity is obtained. It is then drawn 
into rods to form ingots, which is then cut into wafers to obtain the 
silicon wafers to make photovoltaic cells.
Figure 5: Diagram of the PV cell production industry chain.
The smelting of silica and the purification of crystalline silicon 
are technically complex and demanding, requiring materials 
such as coke, charcoal and fine coal to be used in the process 
to produce a reduction reaction with the silica. The process of 
smelting silica at high temperatures consumes a lot of electricity, 
with one tonne of silicon metal consuming around 13,000 kWh of 
electricity. At the same time, the smelting process produces fumes 
containing toxic chemicals, which pollutes the environment more 
and consumes more energy. As the process of smelting silicon 
is an overcapacity in China, manufacturers usually compete 
maliciously at low prices, so the price of silicon metal tends to 
fluctuate more frequently, resulting in many small and medium-
sized manufacturers being reluctant or not having the financial 
strength to invest in building gas treatment equipment. However, 
manufacturers do not pay attention to the fact that if these gases 
and waste heat are recovered and treated in the right way, large 
quantities of silicon micro-powder particles can be obtained and 
they can be re-sold to generate economic benefits. If the waste 
heat can be used in an environmentally friendly way, it can also 
reduce electricity consumption and save economic costs.
At the same time, in the engineering of smelting, most 
manufacturers still use the more popular Siemens smelting and 
purification process, which is prone to produce chemical by-
products of silicon tetrachloride during operation, being corrosive 
and irritating. During the production of crystalline silicon, a large 
amount of wastewater is also produced, containing harmful 
substances such as silicic acid, silica and hydrogen chloride, 
which cannot be dealt with properly. If these substances are not 
handled properly, or if the treatment process is not foolproof, 
and if the smelter goes out of business as the competitive 
environment deteriorates, then there will be no one to take care 
of the contaminated abandonment. Under such circumstances, 
the local governments of China can not control the situation 
since they lack funds or technology to deal with it. Eventually, 
chemical pollutants generated in the production and processing 
of silicon materials may be discharged into the nature or buried 
in the soil in an inappropriate way, which would have a more 
immeasurable negative impact on the local atmosphere, water, 
natural environment and surrounding ecology.
Making photovoltaic panels
According to scholarly research, the process of making silicon 
wafers into solar cells requires processing such as fleece making, 
cleaning, etching and encapsulation, which will produce various 
chemical wastewater containing acid, alkaline or organic, as 
well as air pollutants such as ammonia and isopropyl alcohol. 
Some companies and factories discharge waste water into the 
environment or the atmosphere in order to save costs or because 
of loopholes in their own treatment processes. In addition to 
the corresponding environmental pollution caused by the use of 
raw materials, the use of other auxiliary elements can also lead 
to greater environmental pollution. However, pollutants from the 
production of photovoltaic panels do not receive as much attention 
as those from the smelting process, and there have been cases of 
mass incidents caused by improper disposal of waste materials 
from the production of photovoltaic panels. In fact, the process 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633008
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
of making photovoltaic panels uses a lot of water, eliminates a 
lot of gases, and consumes more energy, all of which may cause 
environmental pollution or break the ring, causing invisible 
environmental costs to the ecology of the local surrounding life.
The pollution focuses of the power station operation and 
energy supply link of the photovoltaic industry
Light pollution
“Light pollution” refers to the overall performance of some 
light that is detrimental to vision, body and natural environment. 
For example, urban buildings are decorated with large mirror 
facades, and glass materials are easy to cause light pollution. 
Solar photovoltaic equipment reflects a certain degree of sunlight 
during operation. Although light pollution has been reduced with 
the development of technology, it is still quite difficult to achieve 
“zero reflection” . When the sun’s radiation is too strong, the solar 
panels on the roofs of surrounding houses reflect light and shine 
brightly, creating environmental pollution from light. Scholars 
have found that in the long-term white and equal light conditions 
in work or daily life, human iris cells and retinas will be damaged 
to varying degrees, and vision will decline faster. The incidence 
of senile cataract has reached 45%. Some people will also exist 
dizziness, insomnia, depressed mood, easy fatigue, upset, appetite 
decline and all kinds of neurasthenia conditions. Generally 
speaking, photovoltaic cells need to be attached to buildings 
and placed in a sunny direction. This means that the sunlight 
reflected by the photovoltaic panels does not reach the ground 
or the lower floors of the house, but instead shines on high-rise 
buildings or aircraft pilots, causing light damage. For long-term 
urban residents, light damage is universal. With the construction 
of distributed photovoltaic in more and more cities in China, light 
pollution is not a problem that can be taken lightly. It will indeed 
pollute the surrounding ecology.
Thermal pollution
Some scholars have studied that the reflectivity of sunlight 
on the heat collection plate is different from the surface of 
the earth. There is a significant difference between them. The 
reflectivity of sunlight on the heat collection plate is likely to 
cause the temperature of local area to rise or fall. This in turn 
causes atmospheric circulation, affecting the surrounding 
environment and causing serious ecological damage. If there is 
a significant change in atmospheric humidity, there is a risk of 
surface weathering. In addition, the thermal balance between the 
surrounding area of the PV plant and the area where the electricity 
is used can be difficult to maintain, which is why large PV plants 
are built in sparsely populated deserts and transmitted outwards 
through the grid. This is why large photovoltaic power stations 
are built in sparsely populated deserts and transmitted outwards 
through the grid. In particular, large photovoltaic power stations 
are at great risk of climate change due to the different heat balance 
conditions among distant locations. Therefore, thermal pollution 
needs to be avoided as much as possible. Thermal pollution is also 
a major environmental risk issue for global climate change.
The focus of pollution in the construction of power stations in 
the photovoltaic industry
As the planning and design of photovoltaic power stations, the 
implementation time is relatively long. During the construction 
period, the surrounding environment is prone to noise, dust, 
water for daily life, machine construction exhaust and other 
aspects of pollution.
Pollution from construction lines and equipment
Construction of photovoltaic power station requires the 
erection of supports, the excavation and filling of cables and 
wires, as well as the subsequent line maintenance. In the 
construction phase, building construction, transport vehicles and 
repair machinery operations, etc. will produce ultra-high decibel 
noise. Secondly, in the implementation phase of constructing 
photovoltaic power stations, the transport of vehicles, construction 
equipment and materials, the pouring of piles and the levelling 
of the foundations will form the corresponding dust and noise 
pollution. In addition, the use of construction equipment during 
construction can also be noisy, which can cause disturbance to the 
animals living in the surrounding area. In particular, birds, which 
love a quiet environment, will instinctively leave the site after 
being exposed to noise, thus leading to a break in the ecological 
food chain. At the same time, there is usually a microclimate 
within a larger climate, which is formed by the weather in the 
soil and vegetation layer, which is about 100m away from the 
earth’s surface in the direction of the atmospheric lead. Besides, 
the construction of the photovoltaic power station will make the 
wind and temperature in the construction area significantly lower, 
and the relative humidity of the air will also change, leading to 
polution to the local natural environment, climate and scenery. 
The construction of photovoltaic power plants will result in the 
fragmentation of the local natural environment and climate, 
creating a greater risk of fragmentation of the natural ecosystem.
Ecological imbalance around the power station
The construction of photovoltaic power stations can easily 
cause the ecological environment to lose its original appearance, 
such as soil erosion, plant damage, changes in the number of 
plants and animals, and damage to the microclimate system. 
Firstly, during the construction of photovoltaic power stations, 
construction activities tend to cause the original topography to 
be modified, soil and water to be lost, and the original surface 
water circulation path to be changed. The topography of the site is 
generally open, so site levelling, dredging and filling of buildings, 
temporary bulldozing of slopes, etc. are also implemented during 
construction. In the event of rain, poor drainage channels will 
produce erosion, which will be detrimental to the surrounding 
area, and the surrounding drainage channels will also become 
waterlogged. Secondly, the construction of power stations 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.55633009
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
involves the construction of electrical facilities, road surfaces, 
building structures and fibre optic cables. The above-mentioned 
construction activities will also cause different degrees of harm 
to the surface vegetation. For example, in ecologically sensitive 
areas, the construction of infrastructure such as soil box 
transformers will destroy the original soil surface and vegetation, 
thus transforming the land in the area from previously grassland 
to construction land, resulting in a decrease in the number of 
plants and an increase in soil erosion. The area where the PV 
plant is to be built usually requires that no endangered species 
are present, so the loss of vegetation is mostly in the form of 
common community structures or weeds with a simple species 
structure. For ecological sensitivity reasons, if the number of 
plants and animals on the surface declines, soil erosion becomes 
more serious and the animals used to inhabit the area have to 
migrate or die due to the destruction of the food chain, resulting 
in an imbalance in the ecological environment.
Pollution from waste
The construction of photovoltaic power stations generally 
involves the following waste: 1) building waste; 2) photovoltaic 
equipment waste; 3) waste from the daily lives of construction 
and transportation workers; 4) waste from transportation and 
operation tools. If these wastes are not properly managed, they 
can easily be invaded into the soil by rain or dispersed into the 
natural environment by wind, thus polluting the environment. 
Therefore, stockpile management becomes extremely important. 
At the same time, the above waste may also pose a risk of pollution 
to the surrounding natural environment in terms of reduced air 
quality.
Battery pollution
Photovoltaic power plants are a system for generating and 
releasing energy and have many components. Photovoltaic 
power systems have a limited lifespan and commonly use lead-
acid batteries, which contain large amounts of lead, antimony, 
cadmium, sulphuric acid and other heavy metals and toxic 
chemicals. According to academic comparisons, in more developed 
countries, about 5% of the lead used in the manufacture of lead-
acid batteries is released into the environment. In developing 
countries, the figure would be around 22-34%. In the case of large 
photovoltaic plants, there are professionals available to dispose 
them, and they are not likely to cause direct pollution to the 
environment, provided they manage properly. However, domestic 
photovoltaic systems cannot be disposed of properly because the 
general population lacks the skills to do so, and because they are 
too dispersed for after-sales management, coupled with a weak 
awareness of environmental protection.
Recommendations for the Photovoltaic Industry in 
Environmental Protection
In order to improve the supply and demand in the rapidly 
advancing market of the PV industry, mainland China has 
gradually adjusted its regulatory efforts and implementation 
measures in the field of environmental protection. Looking at the 
development of the industry in recent decades, it is true that it 
has caused certain problems to the ecological environment. And 
it is not difficult to find that a lot of pollution is caused by human 
beings because of negligent supervision, or blind development. Of 
course the overall quality of practitioners needs to be improved 
and technical level problems need to be solved at the same time. 
Photovoltaic is the core technology first mastered by high-tech 
oligarchs in developed countries such as Europe, the United 
States and Japan. The core advantages of these technologies can 
not really be mastered by our enterprises or R & D institutions. 
Although China has overcome and improved Siemens’ purification 
methods after years of R & D. However, in the core technology 
and enterprise production equipment environment that are truly 
innovative with the times, there is still a gap compared with foreign 
countries. The policy background for the development of China’s 
photovoltaic industry is very special. In order to develop the local 
economy, the local government will generally pay attention to 
the economy first, and then the national pollution control. For 
example, the largest silicon material producer in Luoyang was 
found to be polluting the countryside and rivers, and the problem 
was only reported by the public, and the problems found were 
only expressed as the enterprise had carried out treatment of 
sewage and sludge, which failed to meet the national standards. 
Although the local government gave such a written explanation, 
the pollution of the river caused by the accident and the pollution 
of the surrounding ecological environment did not attract enough 
attention. Therefore, the government, enterprises and everyone 
in China need to make efforts to avoid the pollution caused by 
the industry, to play a positive role in the environment as much 
as possible, and to truly promote the PV industry zero carbon 
emission and zero pollution. This chapter puts forward some 
of the measures and suggestions for the PV industry in terms of 
environmental protection issues in China for reference.
Improving upstream process technology
China’s crystalline silicon production enterprises mostly 
adopt closed-loop improved Siemens method to produce 
crystalline silicon materials. They are mostly large enterprises, 
and their business basically involve a wider range of financial 
strength, stronger innovation, and more technical personnel. The 
manufacturing links can basically meet China’s environmental 
requirements. However, the eagerness to pursue economic 
development throughout the vast territory of China has led many 
enterprises to adopt the more backward technology of simulating 
foreign technology, which is not really the “modified Siemens 
method” technology at all. This directly leads to high energy 
consumption, pollution of the ecological environment and the 
generation of three wastes. In the last decade, China’s crystalline 
silicon purification technology has indeed been greatly improved, 
but it is still not complete. More enterprises are reluctant to take 
the initiative to replace new technology and equipment due to cost 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330010
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
issues, and are eventually forced to shut down, go bankrupt or 
close down. Some enterprises also need the relevant departments 
to forcefully supervise in order to have some transformation. 
In view of the above, the following environmental protection 
measures can be referred to in this section.
Raising the threshold for industry access
Firstly, local governments should take a firm view of long-term 
development and look at the bigger picture, select high-quality 
investment enterprises as far as possible, raise the entry threshold 
for the crystalline silicon industry, and screen out experienced 
practitioners from the source, who understand management, 
technology and have sufficient capital flow to set up the enterprise 
and operate the project. Secondly, the relevant departments will 
increase supervision and inspection and other management efforts 
to guide the safe and compliant discharge of waste gas, waste 
water and slag from enterprises, and randomly check the density 
of environmental pollution around the enterprises from time to 
time. For enterprises that would allow the surrounding ecological 
environment to be polluted, they are ordered to completely rectify 
the situation and then follow up for approval on whether they can 
resume production. Those who cause serious pollution and fail 
to rectify as required may be punished or even banned according 
to law. These problematic enterprises are also provided with M 
& A, acquisition and other channels to help them exit the market 
and industry. In addition, they should coordinate with powerful 
enterprises that can quickly take over at a lower price to avoid 
environmental pollution caused by long-term shutdown without 
any responsibility. Again, the government needs to provide some 
policy support and set up a special support fund to supervise and 
encourage crystalline silicon production enterprises to increase 
investment, continuous innovation, improve the competitive 
advantage of the industry. Moreover, encouraging the introduction 
of advanced production equipment and production processes in 
response to the changing needs of the market, so that the level 
of environmental protection production of enterprises can meet 
the requirements and indicators of the department of national 
environmental protection.
Support leading enterprises to set an example
Despite the rapid development of China’s crystalline silicon 
industry, a production capacity of 505,000 tons was achieved in 
2021. The market outlook is positive, and the existing technology 
can meet the independent research and development, and achieve 
independent manufacturing of process equipment. However, 
the core technology is not strong enough, and has been out of 
the stage of catching up with the giants of Europe, America and 
Japan. The government should vigorously support China’s leading 
crystalline silicon enterprises, help them increase investment in 
scientific research, improve process equipment, independent 
research and development of purification of core technology, 
optimise production processes as far as possible. The average 
cost of production should be reduced in the industry, making 
the industry develop orderly under the role of demonstration 
companies, avoid vicious competition and low-cost competition 
regardless of environmental costs. A more cost-competitive price 
will allow China’s crystalline silicon sector to fulfil its global 
competitiveness and operational potential, and better achieve 
sustainable development of the industry. Strive for better cost, 
higher quality and more environmentally crystalline silicon 
products, which in turn will reduce the damage to the ecological 
environment.
Waste recovery and recycling
Recycling is an important sustainable development concept. 
Recycling is not a one-sided reuse, but a process of turning waste 
materials back into recyclable materials. The proportion of 
recyclable material varies depending on the material used. The 
photovoltaic industry produces a large amount of silicon scrap, 
auxiliary component trimmings, as well as newer and scrapped 
original components. If these waste materials are recycled well, 
not only can the problem of solid waste pollution be solved, but 
also a better sense of cost control is established for the production 
enterprises, bringing certain economic benefits. This is good for 
business development and even better for the environment. 
The following is a list of recycling methods that can be used for 
reference.
Building a green recycling industry chain
In the recycling of waste materials from silicon production, 
such as waste mortar, the industry has formed an industry based 
on the recycling of PEG (polyethylene glycol) and silicon carbide. 
But the recycling of silicon powder with a higher value is still in 
its infancy. Some of the companies in China that are dedicated 
to the development of industrial intelligent equipment and 
digital intelligent equipment are making great efforts to develop 
corresponding recycling technologies and equipment in order 
to achieve the commercial scale of silicon waste recycling and 
utilisation. Crystalline silicon produces 20%-30% of waste in 
the cutting process, and a production capacity of 500,000 tonnes 
will produce 100,000-150,000 tonnes of silicon waste. Through 
silicon waste recycling and utilisation equipment systems, this 
silicon waste can be recycled and reused to achieve a green 
recycling industry chain. For example, Xinyuan Technology 
Company and Shangrao Supply Chain Management signed a 
production equipment automation service contract for a 5,000 
tonne per year project relating to the recycling and purification 
of silicon fertiliser in September last year. The equipment, 
excluding the cost of raw materials for silicon waste, electricity 
and depreciation of equipment, costs about 30,000 yuan per 
tonne to produce, while the price of recycled silicon is 200,000 
yuan per tonne. 5,000 tonnes of silicon waste recycling project 
income of about 1 billion, plus the policy concessions for the first 
five years of the company, will create a profit of about 500 to 600 
million yuan for the company. With the further improvement of 
scientific research, technology and equipment optimization and 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330011
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
perfection, it is believed that silicon waste recycling equipment 
will accelerate the realization of large-scale commercialization 
and industrialization, and solve the problem of recycling silicon 
waste while enhancing economic benefits, reducing the pollution 
of the ecological environment and realizing green recycling and 
low-carbon production.
Building a recycling management system
From 2007 to 2010, China rapidly entered the industrialisation 
stage of photovoltaic development, and the storage capacity of 
photovoltaic power generation units has been rising year by year, 
while the service life of photovoltaic power generation plants is 
about 25 years. In addition to the damage caused by natural and 
human factors, some components will need to be eliminated 
and replaced from the first five years of operation. With a huge 
incremental market and stock market, the number of PV modules 
that are scrapped is also huge. However, the high cost of recycling 
and transportation leads to low economic efficiency. Overall, 
China’s PV module recycling technology, still in its infancy, has not 
formed a mature and scalable application. See the following two 
areas.
1. Enhancement of PV module recycling technology. 
Technical enterprises (e.g., the Institute of Electrical 
Engineering of the Chinese Academy of Sciences) and 
enterprises related to the PV industry should increase their 
investment, continue to innovate and carry out relevant basic 
research, so that PV module recycling technology can be 
gradually improved, end-of-life PV modules can be effectively 
recycled and reused, and ecological pollution can be reduced 
as much as possible.
2. Construct a management system for the recycling 
of photovoltaic modules. Firstly, national attention and 
smarter regulation are needed. The Development and Reform 
Commission and the Ministry of Ecology and Environment 
have set up an information notification mechanism for PV 
project cycles, created a nationwide information network 
platform, increased supervision of end-of-life PV module end-
processing. At the same time platform support was provided 
for recycling and reuse enterprises through the internet, big 
data and other modern communication technologies, such as 
information, procurement and logistics services. Secondly, for 
the problem of low economic benefits of recycling and reusing 
PV modules, financial incentives and certain tax incentives 
can be implemented to help PV enterprise producers optimise 
their designs and take the initiative to take responsibility for 
the pollution caused to the ecological environment in the 
production of the enterprise, so as to achieve the sustainable 
development of PV as a clean and renewable energy source. 
Once again, continuously improve the recycling system of PV 
module end-of-life, appropriately categorise PV module waste, 
etc. into the electronic raw material recycling management 
system and clarify the process of utilisation of each link. 
The main responsibility of the whole industry upstream, 
midstream and downstream links is to build a PV module 
recycling and recycling management system. Finally, they 
should develop and improve the module recycling standard 
system, and manage the PV industry from the perspective of 
laws and regulations, so that PV power generation can achieve 
a truly green and sustainable development.
Upgrading PV energy storage technology
PV power generation is inseparable from the power 
storage system. Improving PV energy storage technology helps 
the industry develop to a higher level. Photovoltaic power 
generation applications of electricity storage methods are mainly 
supercapacitors and batteries, as well as superconducting and 
flywheel energy storage. The main way is battery energy storage, 
currently more widely used by lead-acid batteries because of its 
reliable performance and high degree of modularity. However, 
the general life of the battery is 3-5 years, the replacement 
frequency is high, and improper handling will bring pollution 
to the local ecological environment. The state should introduce 
corresponding policies to guide capital investment in the 
research and development of terminal energy storage products, 
while guiding relevant battery factories to invest more research 
and development funds, research and development of more 
energy storage advantages of technology, design more efficient 
and environmentally friendly energy storage products, so that 
photovoltaic power generation and energy storage can achieve 
common growth of environmentally friendly green products. 
As China’s energy storage technology has been a difficult point, 
scientists are still in the process of research and development. The 
market needs low cost, excellent quality, long life products. There 
are not enough new research material, so it is inconvenient to do 
too much analysis here.
Environmental recommendations for the construction of 
photovoltaic power stations
Planning from the top, building green photovoltaic power 
stations
From the planning, survey, environmental assessment, 
construction of photovoltaic power station to the completion 
of operation, governments around the world need to develop a 
perfect plan about the green power station and post-supervision 
protection program, including the groundwater pollution 
treatment, ground vegetation damage situation, the effective 
treatment of solid waste, the prevention of air pollution, the 
surrounding flora and fauna habitat, etc. They should have 
adequate preplanning and assessment to prevent environmental 
pollution accidents, but also to prevent the disturbance and 
destruction of the ecological living environment.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330012
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Using intelligent environmental monitoring to guard the 
green operation of PV power stations
Photovoltaic power stations, the implementation of 
environmental monitoring systems, real-time integrated 
monitoring of the internal and peripheral links of the power 
station, its internal and external temperature, humidity, soil 
composition, water sources nearby, vegetation and other 
multifaceted factors should be considered for real-time big data 
analysis and comprehensive evaluation. Besides,the ecological 
environment around its targeted real-time control can be prepared 
to do prevention and management of the ecological environment 
around the power station. The possible adverse ecological impact 
during the operation of the power station is minimised.
Increase the number of environmental monitoring staff 
and improve the power station management system
During the operation of the photovoltaic power station, 
environmental protection and management should be focused 
on. On the one hand, a PV power station ecological environment 
monitoring and protection department should be set up to 
ensure the smooth implementation of daily environmental 
monitoring The surrounding ecological environment situation 
should be regularly monitored, and the surrounding ecological 
resources damage should be timely managed; On the other 
hand, a ecological environment monitoring system of the power 
station can be established. In the actual governance, through the 
corresponding ecological environmental protection strategy, the 
relevant system, the PV power station inside and outside the air 
pollution, ecological environment pollution and light pollution 
should be comprehensively prevented and controlled. Scientific 
and reasonable real-time monitoring of the environment inside 
and outside the photovoltaic power station, work on a refined 
management approach and real-time control and management of 
possible pollution should be made to ensure that the production 
of photovoltaic power is more energy efficient, green and 
environmentally friendly.
Government departments playing a policy guidance and 
regulatory role
The PV industry needs to continue to introduce various 
regulatory measures, using laws and regulations to urge 
enterprises and prevent pollution incidents from arising, with 
policy support to help the green and healthy development of the 
PV industry.
Relevant departments announce subsidy policies to help 
the healthy development of PV
At different stages of PV industry development, national 
policies should be prophetic first, giving enterprises and technology 
research and development institutions a series of subsidy 
benefits, including installed subsidies, feed-in tariff subsidies, 
and using different forms of subsidies, such as cash subsidies, 
tax reductions or concessions, investment rate proportional 
subsidies and advance payments. With the continuous expansion 
of the PV industry, a number of excellent PV enterprises have been 
cultivated, and the PV industry has gradually moved from the 
previous policy planning economy to a market economy. The cost 
of power generation has fallen to the lowest in history and can 
match the cost of traditional energy sources, and more regions 
have achieved grid parity. However, the country still needs to adopt 
certain financial subsidies, tax concessions, loan concessions and 
deferred loans and other policies to encourage breakthroughs or 
enhancements in the technical level of the industry, to promote 
scientific research institutions and enterprises to do real work. 
We are not afraid of policy support and capital investment traps. 
To achieve green development of the photovoltaic industry, more 
active and efficient policy changes are needed.The government 
and enterprises are of one mind, only then can we truly embark 
on the green PV road.
Raise awareness of regulations among industry personnel 
and strengthen substantive supervision by the government
The photovoltaic industry needs to be escorted by laws 
and regulations. Firstly, green development requires relevant 
departments (Ministry of Environmental Protection, Ministry of 
Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology, etc.) to play a joint supervision mechanism, multi-
departmental linkage and build a platform for dialogue between 
enterprises and the government. Regulations should be promoted 
for enterprises, carrying out training for PV practitioners, 
implementing an assessment for personnel to pass the assessment 
before they can be employed, and the assessment must include 
content related to environmental protection. Secondly, we 
should improve the regulations governing the development of 
environmental protection in the industry, implement an extended 
responsibility system for producers in the PV industry, clarify the 
social and environmental responsibilities of enterprises involved 
in the PV industry chain, and institutionalise the responsibilities 
of all subjects. We will also develop national standards for each 
technology and pollution control in the PV industry, such as 
collection, storage and transportation, and strictly enforce the 
laws and regulations related to the PV industry.
Put an end to abusive policies and negligent regulation. 
Environmental protection departments should improve the 
regulations and professional quality of law enforcement officers, 
while the local PV industry needs to increase supervision, and the 
PV industry itself is a sunrise industry that benefits the country 
and the people. However, the implementation of policies around 
the different strengths leads to poor results. For example, in some 
regions, companies are blindly developing their industry layout in 
order to obtain state subsidies and financial incentives, and even 
investing in production without scientific planning of production 
equipment and production processes, placing too much emphasis 
on short-term benefits. They have not incorporated environmental 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330013
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
protection into their business management and lack a sense 
of responsibility for environmental protection. In addition, the 
development of China’s photovoltaic enterprises speed up. The 
product sales mainly rely on exports, and export destinations 
are mostly developed countries in Europe and the United States. 
China’s photovoltaic enterprises and local governments are prone 
to greed for immediate economic interests, and there will not 
be regulatory implementation. The supply chain of the source 
of pollution left to the domestic, and thus increasing the cost of 
our environment. Therefore, what often needs to be improved is 
the government assessment mechanism, the implementation of 
policies, the improvement of the government management model, 
the government’s ability to govern, etc. The people in power are 
those who understand laws and regulations, which is the first step 
to do a good job in supervision. Then, in the implementation of laws 
and regulations, better manage the development of photovoltaic 
industry and protect green and sustainable development.
Establishing and improving laws and regulations
For China to stand firm in PV power generation on a sustainable 
basis, it is not enough to rely on government policy guidance alone. 
In the development of the photovoltaic industry, the Renewable 
Energy Law implemented in 2006, has been used as the basis for 
factoring. After a short period of market adaptation, the law was 
reworked in 2009 in order to better regulate the development of 
the market, allowing some of the conditions that had previously 
hindered the development of renewable energy to be improved 
to some extent. However, after more than a decade, the act still 
has a number of shortcomings in terms of development content. 
And its accompanying PV development regulations are in need 
of improvement, such as the lack of an incentive system for the 
PV industry. To promote the sustainable development of the PV 
economy, regulations need to be continuously strengthened.
Typical case studies of the photovoltaic industry in 
environmental protection
Although there are still many environmental shortcomings 
in the photovoltaic power generation industry, The strong 
momentum of the development of the photovoltaic industry 
cannot be stopped, and the historical mission of photovoltaic 
power generation as an important renewable energy in the 
future cannot be stopped. In order to achieve China’s 3060 
double carbon requirements, we need to adhere to the scientific 
concept of ecological development and use photovoltaic to create 
new ecological development opportunities. The author selected 
several successful photovoltaic power generation projects in 
China for case study as following.
Large-scale distributed photovoltaic projects in urban 
construction
With the development of the photovoltaic industry in the 
last decade, industrial technology, processes and production 
equipment have been comprehensively upgraded. Photovoltaic 
power generation, mainly in the form of distributed power 
generation projects, is slowly developing in cities. As technology 
continues to innovate, it brings more green and clean energy 
supply. Usually, a large number of photovoltaic power generation 
systems are used above buildings such as large railway stations, 
high-speed railway stations, airports, schools and parks to achieve 
the large-scale and universal application of clean energy, which 
not only meets the daily electricity needs within the buildings, 
but also sells electricity to earn benefits and gets more and more 
organisations involved.
Photovoltaic demonstration project of railway station: Wuhan 
Railway Station is a PV power generation project completed in 
2009, using the building roof and storm shelters for PV power 
generation, reducing the consumption of traditional energy power. 
As an important demonstration project for PV power generation 
in Hubei Province, it uses the building model of PV building 
integration, which is the largest volume and installed capacity 
of the province’s PV project to date. Relevant data shows that 
the photovoltaic power generation project generates about 2.04 
million kilowatt hours of electricity per year, which is equivalent 
to a reduction of about 2,040 tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions 
and about 557 tonnes of standard coal per year. The distributed 
and large-scale application of photovoltaic power generation 
projects in the city will not only bring economic benefits but 
will also bring environmental benefits for carbon reduction and 
emission reduction.
Building centralised PV power generation projects in 
desert areas
How to maximise the role of photovoltaic energy for ecological 
environmental protection, how to scientifically lay out and utilise 
photovoltaic energy according to local conditions, and how to 
enhance the proportion of photovoltaic energy consumption. 
These aspects should be considered. We should full use of the 
characteristics of desert areas, such as extensive land resources, 
sufficient sunshine, sparse population and lack of animal and 
plant resources, to apply PV power generation in a large scale 
and centralised manner. Practice is needed to solve the ecological 
landscape of the desert areas, to explore a new photovoltaic road 
to wealth.For example, Northwest China is a blessed place for 
photovoltaic. Land desertification, serious population outflow 
and poor natural conditions in Northwest China have always been 
the “pain” of China’s development. China’s desertification area 
exceeds 2.6 million square kilometers, accounting for about 30% 
of China’s land area. Northwest China is an area to be developed 
and has great development potential. After years of practical 
experience and the establishment of exchange platforms related 
to sand control (such as the Kubuqi International Desert Forum), 
PV projects in desertification areas have achieved remarkable 
results and valuable practical experience, which have helped 
China to reduce the desertification process.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330014
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
China’s No.1 photovoltaic project - Qinghai Tala Tan 
photovoltaic power station - is located in Tala Tan in Qinghai 
province, where was once a semi-deserted grassland turning 
into an important demonstration project for the photovoltaic 
industry. It covers an area of 609 square kilometres, being close 
to the size of a Singapore. Not only has the pastoral industry been 
developed and the ecology restored, but it has also led to economic 
development. The annual power generation reaches more than 9 
billion KW/H, which is equivalent to saving 2.7 million tonnes of 
standard coal consumption and reducing CO2 emissions by about 
9 million tonnes per year. At the same time, due to the management 
needs of the power station, thousands of jobs are brought to the 
local area. With the sand receding and greening into the project, it 
drives the development of local agriculture and animal husbandry, 
developing photovoltaic sheep, photovoltaic crops (Cistanches, 
Chinese wolfberries, licorice, etc.) , which not only solves the 
risk of fire after the grass grows high, but also makes full use 
of the space under the board, driving local farmers to develop 
breeding and planting, and achieving well-off and wealthy. The 
electricity is not only used for the local power grid, but also can 
be transported to Jiangsu, Henan and other power grid systems, 
realising the clean use of photovoltaic power generation, reducing 
the consumption of highly polluting traditional energy sources 
and promoting energy restructuring. The success of sand control 
and sand management in combination with photovoltaic power 
generation projects has also led to a thorough improvement of the 
ecological environment.
Concentrated photovoltaic power generation projects 
have blossomed in desertification areas, setting up one green 
photovoltaic power station after another, with sand receding and 
greening, adding many carbon sink forests and grasslands, thus 
improving the ecological environment.
Future Outlook of the PV Industry in Environmental 
Protection
The various stages that our photovoltaic industry has gone 
through in the past have been the cornerstones of its future 
sound development. Global climate change is becoming more 
and more dramatic, posing urgent challenges to the future of 
the world’s energy sources. Coupled with the global outbreak of 
epidemics in recent years, this has put the world on pause, and 
people are forced to think about the optimal solution for man and 
the environment to live in harmony. The future energy mix will 
be redefined, with new or renewable energy sources gradually 
expanding their share, as shown in (Figure 6). 
Figure 6: Future energy development in China.
The development of photovoltaics has become one of the most 
important initiatives to solve environmental problems. in May 
2022, the state issued the Implementation Plan on Promoting 
the High Quality Development of New Energy in the New Era, 
proposing that in 30 years, the total installed power generation 
capacity of these two types of re-energy sources in China will 
reach more than 1.2 billion kW. A global institution has estimated 
that in 60 years, the total installed capacity of photovoltaic power 
generation in China will account for 40% of the total landscape 
new energy, which is about 26 times the growth space compared 
with the current relevant data, and the required land area is 
45,000 square kilometres. It can be said that both domestic policy 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330015
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
guidance, or international prediction of China’s photovoltaic 
development, have shown that China’s photovoltaic industry has 
a more positive and important role in environmental protection. 
It is believed that PV will have greater opportunities for future 
development under China’s “double carbon” target.
Future technologies for green PV development
To be able to promote the rapid development of the economy 
in the future, as well as drive the environment to be better 
protected. The core factor of the photovoltaic industry is that 
technology can continue to break through and progress. As the 
largest and most comprehensive PV industry chain in China, its 
every link needs technological progress to upgrade. In the future, 
there is hope that technological advances will solve or balance the 
environmental pollution problems that exist in the manufacturing 
and operational aspects, and that technology will allow PV to 
make more contributions to environmental protection.
Technological advances to promote the green 
development of PV equipment and accessories
Example: Chinese patent technology of polyolefin photovoltaic 
backsheet technology use. As the most basic component of 
photovoltaic power generation, the back of the battery component 
is the outermost layer of the photovoltaic backsheet, whose 
function is to protect the photovoltaic cells. However, we all know 
that the service life of PV cells is at least 25-30 years, so we need 
PV backsheets to achieve the same service life as PV cells in order 
to be the most environmentally friendly and cost saving. However, 
PV backsheets are currently made up of a basic layer, a protection 
layer and an adhesive layer. The basic layer contains PET , which 
has been used for around 30 years in practice. However, the PET 
material is prone to cracking, delamination and deterioration of 
the adhesion conditions over time, which in turn does not provide 
a stable protection for the battery. In addition, the protective 
layer contains a fluorine film, which is difficult to degrade and 
recycle, and it is easy to cause pollution to the environment. In 
order to solve this problem, our scientists have delved into the 
field of photovoltaic backsheet research and have been making 
breakthroughs in polyolefin materials since 2009, applying for a 
number of patented technologies. Polyolefin materials are more 
barrier, protective and environmentally friendly and reusable 
than previous materials, so the industry is gradually trying 
to replace PET and fluorine films with polyolefin materials. 
This is why the industry is gradually trying to replace PET and 
fluorine films with polyolefin materials, in order to obtain a more 
environmentally friendly PV backsheet, as well as to improve 
the poor performance of the original backsheet and to change 
the solar module and extend its service life. It is an important 
application direction at present and in the future. China is now 
already a large sales country for photovoltaic formation. In actual 
use, fluorine backsheet is still a mainstream. However, Europe, the 
United States and Japan and other countries containing fluorine 
backsheet retention are greater. For this reason, China can also 
continue to make breakthrough in technology, according to 
different stock market, research and development of different 
new materials and new products, in order to replace the global 
original use of low environmental performance of the product. It 
will have market prospects and more environmental significance.
Technology to promote photovoltaic hydrogen production, 
helping the industry to find a new green development growth 
pole
In recent years, the development of China’s photovoltaic 
industry has been in an unstable situation due to factors such as 
the rise in upstream raw materials, the price fluctuations of silicon, 
and the decline in demand for photovoltaic materials caused by 
overseas epidemics. At the other end of the spectrum, hydrogen is 
still mainly made from fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas, which 
cannot be adapted to the times. As a result, a double-needed path 
was formed, in which PV companies made hydrogen to seek new 
growth and the original hydrogen production companies turned 
to use PV to save themselves. The development of the photovoltaic 
industry and the green market for hydrogen production have led 
to the development of photovoltaic hydrogen production under 
the conditions of existing technology. Over the years, researchers 
have researched the production of green hydrogen energy from 
photovoltaics through electrolytic water production units. This 
technology is now developing faster abroad and is gradually 
maturing in China. Compared to other conventional hydrogen 
production technologies, some scholars have researched 
photovoltaic power generation for hydrogen supply, which is more 
continuous and reliable, with a progressively lower relative cost 
and zero carbon emissions in the hydrogen production process. 
The market application of PV hydrogen production technology 
has also been put on the development agenda. In March 2021, 
PV industry Longi, as the largest PV enterprise in China, started 
to enter the PV hydrogen production business, followed by the 
head enterprises in the industry such as Xiexin New Energy, 
Sunshine Power and Jinko Power, which have responded by 
building up all aspects of hydrogen production technology, 
operation management and industry chain cooperation. Among 
them, the alkaline water electrolyzer built by LONGi in Wuxi, 
Jiangsu Province, has a single hydrogen preparation capacity of 
1000Nm/h. Through the technology, we are actively building up 
the industrialisation of photovoltaics and hydrogen production. 
Of course, the industry is still in continuous development and 
the future market demand is high. Compared to traditional fossil 
energy hydrogen production, photovoltaic hydrogen production 
effectively reduces the previous consumption of fossil energy, 
reduces the emission of carbon dioxide and other by-product 
pollutants, and achieves a multi-effective linkage among the 
coal and chemical industries, the petrochemical industry, the 
renewable energy industry and the new fuel cell industry in the 
environmental protection business.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330016
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Smarter and more convenient grid-connected photovolta-
ic module technology as a future trend
Unlike other re-energy power generation, photovoltaic power 
generation has more space for regional use. So such a wide use 
of space on the intelligent operation of photovoltaic power 
generation components is convenient installation providing 
higher requirements. Some scholars say that traditional solar 
module systems cannot take into account each module in series 
and parallel because of the power problem, which means that it 
is difficult to make individual modules operate in an optimal way 
under normal working conditions, thus affecting the efficiency of 
the power generation system. This makes power generation more 
modular, systematic and simple, which in turn makes it possible 
to build PV power stations quickly and improve the stability and 
efficiency of the system. At the same time, research into the power 
management system of smart PV modules has shown the use of 
new data analysis and processing methods to achieve flexibility 
in algorithms and powerful processing capabilities. The use of 
advanced design concepts to integrate intelligent photovoltaic 
modules into the internal intelligent power management system 
allows the PV power generation system to achieve power 
management mode component level, and provides a better 
basis for research state with monitoring systems to implement 
monitoring of each module. In this way, intelligent inspection of 
individual modules can better improve the reliability and safety of 
PV power generation in system operation. This will improve the 
reliability and safety of the system. Of course, in the future there 
will be more and more new technologies such as the Internet of 
Things wireless sensor technology. Through the empowerment 
of these technologies to sense the outside world of photovoltaic 
power generation, a sensor network mode of measurement and 
control network are bulit in such a sensor network measurement 
and control platform to establish intelligent monitoring and 
auxiliary control systems. These measures aim to achieve the 
operation and management of photovoltaic power plants under 
intelligent monitoring state, achieve intelligent monitoring, 
intelligent management, intelligent judgement, etc. In short, 
with the continuous construction of distributed photovoltaic 
projects in China, the power supply provided by those who make 
electricity online in terms of technology, safety risks, monitoring, 
metering, control, etc. will face a variety of complex conditions, 
so that the latest photovoltaic power generation system and its 
components need to be more intelligent and convenient. In the 
future, intelligent and fast photovoltaic industrial systems are 
indeed, and their popularity can make a continuous green energy 
contribution to the cause of environmental protection in China.
Diversified and integrated development of the 
photovoltaic industry
The future energy structure will tend to be networked, what 
is “energy networking”? What does “energy networking” mean? It 
means building up a network system that allows multiple energy 
sources to complement each other. As we are now vigorously 
pursuing the “double carbon” goal, the proportion of “non-carbon 
energy” in the future is bound to increase strategic significance. 
PV power supply, oil and gas power supply, hydrogen power 
supply and new energy storage systems will form an integrated 
development model, which will push the PV industry from high-
speed development to high-quality development. The future of the 
photovoltaic industry will continue to intensify the elimination 
of the fittest, and green environmental protection is the theme 
of development. With the gradual decline in PV costs in China in 
recent years, most places have achieved grid-parity PV energy 
supply. The next market development trend will be to diversify 
and integrate the transformation, giving greater added value 
to each product in the PV industry chain. Some foreign voices 
have said that they want to overtake the Chinese PV industry 
through PV diversification in 2011. This has also stimulated 
innovation in models and technologies in integrated building 
integration, fisheries and light complementarity, agriculture and 
light complementarity, etc. in China. Models such as aircraft or car 
integrated PV have become the new direction of development.
Being different from the previous BAPV (photovoltaic system 
attached to the roof) model, BIPV currently has two forms of 
expression: the combination with the building and the integration 
with the building. Some scholars predict a widespread explosion 
in the industrial use of BIPV starting in 2023. The emergence 
of BIPV was made possible by two documents, the Notice on 
the Submission of Pilot Schemes for Distributed Rooftop PV 
Development in Whole Counties (Cities and Districts) and the 
Technical Regulations for Roofing with PV Modules, which came 
into effect in January this year. This marks the opening of the 
prelude to the integration of rooftop photovoltaic buildings 
in China, but also accelerate the process of transformation of 
China’s energy structure and lead the high-quality development 
of the photovoltaic industry. Now through a high level of building 
mode, an energy-consuming building can be transformed into an 
energy-saving building, and then into a capacity of the building, 
which is BIPV. It is based on the standard of China’s distributed 
photovoltaic utilization and development of the technical basis, 
and China’s roof photovoltaic installation technology progress, 
quality standards and capacity iterative upgrade of the industry 
development status. At present, almost all key PV enterprises are 
laying out the development of BIPV, such as Longji’s “Longding” 
and Trina’s “Tianneng tile” . In the future, there will be a richer 
variety of PV buildings and more diversified ways to create green 
energy. Large enterprises with technology, pattern and knowledge 
of environmental protection will be more and more suitable for 
the needs of the new period and develop better, while other 
enterprises with insufficient capacity and lack of strategic vision 
will inevitably usher in a major reshuffle of the industry, and the 
elimination of the fittest is inevitable. By promoting the integration 
of photovoltaic buildings, the photovoltaic industry has blazed a 
new path in energy conservation and emission reduction in terms 
of environmental protection and green ecology.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330017
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
The future development of the PV industry and energy 
storage trend
At present, the cost of photovoltaic power generation in China 
is already the lowest in history and can already compete with 
conventional energy sources with more advantages. The most 
important disadvantage is that the energy supply is unstable, and 
the next step in the whole industry chain needs to be solved is the 
problem of high-quality low-cost energy storage, which sends out 
solar energy, reserves it, stabilizes it and then supplies it out. Once 
the energy storage problem is solved, the energy transmission of 
the whole chain will not be a problem. At present, China’s energy 
storage situation is still in the process of continuous development, 
and so far has not yet fully found a good way to store energy 
with high technology and low equipment cost. As mentioned 
above, photovoltaic power generation has different sunlight and 
different energy supply. At the present stage of the large-scale 
development of photovoltaic power generation in China, if a high 
proportion of power enters the power grid, the grid system will 
be “unable to eat, can not catch” . High safety and energy-efficient 
storage methods are needed to balance supply and demand, to 
maximise the potential of energy storage, to connect “generation, 
transmission, storage, distribution and use” , to share light and 
storage, and to promote the long-term high-quality development 
of PV. In July 2011, the “Guidance on accelerating the development 
of new energy storage” was issued, stating that in 25 years, China 
will achieve from the initial stage of commercialisation of new 
energy storage to the stage of large-scale development. What’s 
more, energy storage equipment should have a high safety factor, 
low cost of use, reliable performance and long life. New energy 
storage equipment needs to be fully marketed in 30 years, which 
is the strategic goal. The equipment should be fully marketable. 
For example, on 11 April 2021, the world’s first photovoltaic plus 
energy storage, outdoor demonstration experimental platform 
under the responsibility of the State Power Investment Corporation 
broke ground for construction. Its construction can promote the 
solution of China’s PV plus energy storage technology through 
the PV and energy storage, together with the development of the 
rapid and accurate storage of electricity, so that the short-term 
fluctuations of PV power supply can be balanced. These measures 
are made to ensure the maximum load power to be curbed, reduce 
the emergence of supply-side peaks, contribute to the stability of 
electricity prices, reduce the cost of future transmission network 
upgrades and capacity expansions. In any case, energy storage is 
a core issue that needs to be addressed as soon as possible, and a 
comprehensive solution to the energy storage problem will allow 
PV to move more steadily and better in terms of environmental 
protection.
The future of the photovoltaic industry will be green by 
taking advantage of its geographical location
Northwest China and other regions have abundant sunshine, 
long sunshine hours, strong penetration of light, and flat 
geographical advantages. There are also deserts, grasslands, 
saline alkali lands, old abandoned industrial and mining areas and 
uninhabited wasteland. The development of large-scale centralized 
photovoltaic power plants has geographical advantages. Taking 
Shaanxi for example, the local Yulin City completed centralized 
grid-connected commercial photovoltaic power generation 
projects amounting to 6.25 million kilowatts. There are 116 power 
stations in the Mawusu Sands alone, amounting to 6,152,000 
KW, which have also attracted overseas media attention. The 
ecosystems in these areas are fragile and unsuitable for human 
life. Building large scale photovoltaic power stations is a way to 
revitalise the stock of land and ecological resources according 
to local conditions. Making full use of the value of ecological 
resources and turning disadvantages into advantages is the future 
trend of green development in China’s domestic PV industry. 
Through photovoltaic power generation projects, technology and 
talent are driven deep into these unfavourable production and 
living places. Playing the subjective initiative and transformative 
wisdom of people, actively implementing green strategies, 
ecological development and environmental protection strategies, 
making every effort to balance the conflict between sustainable 
development and ecology, helping to enrich the local area and 
finding a new ecological balance while allowing PV to generate 
clean energy, and awakening the original vitality of ecology, are 
the future trends of China’s development. 
The northern regions of China are suitable for the development 
of the photovoltaic power industry, which can improve the local 
economic situation and guarantee a green energy supply, as well 
as taking on the responsibility of building an ecological civilisation 
and protecting environmental biodiversity. Photovoltaic power 
supply gives wings to regional poverty eradication and opens up 
new ideas for the green take-off of the local economy. Combined 
with the local ecological and environmental conditions, a scientific 
and quantitative assessment is made to find out the punch-
out syndrome between industrial development and ecological 
environment, so as to achieve a more comprehensive and safer 
sustainable operation of the photovoltaic industry in the local 
area.
Future cross-industry complementarity to promote the green 
development of the photovoltaic industry
The photovoltaic industry itself has the advantage of 
environmental protection and energy saving, and in the future it 
can be combined with the pollution industry across industries to 
complement each other’s strengths and achieve a balanced and 
far-reaching effect. In the future, the photovoltaic industry will 
continue to drive other industries together to bear the fruits of 
environmental protection. The following are examples from two 
areas to illustrate the form of cross-industry complementarity.
PV and wastewater treatment plants complement each 
other as a new trend
In China, the average electricity consumption is 0.292 
KWh/m3. If the daily treatment capacity of the national sewage 
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330018
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
treatment plants is 16.573 million cubic meters, it will cost about 
48.39 million kilowatt hours of electricity to treat sewage every 
day, which is equivalent to the daily power generation of Gezhouba 
hydropower station. The annual electricity consumption is 13.318 
billion KWh, accounting for about 0.2% of the total electricity 
consumption of society. Electricity consumption and high operating 
costs reduce the investment benefits of sewage treatment plants, 
and even become a bottleneck in the normal operation of some 
sewage treatment plants. As the problem of energy shortage and 
environmental pollution is becoming increasingly serious, energy 
saving and consumption reduction have become an urgent to 
address the realities of the sewage treatment industry. Therefore, 
the “photovoltaic plus sewage plant” model will be widely invoked 
in the future. The biological ponds of wastewater treatment plants 
occupy a large area and are left unused, so if photovoltaic modules 
are set up over the biological ponds, the space resources can be 
used effectively without taking up land area. And photovoltaic 
power generation system can not only effectively reduce the 
operating costs of the sewage plant, to provide green power 
energy for the plant, but also to better protect the environment, 
to contribute to energy saving and environmental protection. It is 
simply a win-win situation.
Generally speaking, sewage treatment plants occupy a large 
area, relatively few buildings around, few high-rise buildings, and 
the pools and roofs of sewage treatment plants have a large area and 
good building quality, which is very conducive to the installation 
and efficient use of photovoltaic modules.It can be based on the 
different classifications of the integrated biochemical pond, by 
adding a roof at the end of the wastewater treatment process - 
the top of the clarifier, to reduce the wind speed above the pool, 
improve the local small environment, reduce the evaporation 
of pool water, improve the temperature of the pool water, and 
increase the return on sewage treatment. Secondly, the land of the 
sewage treatment plant is generally administratively allocated, 
and the land use life is in principle infinitely long. Compared to 
other urban building roof development distributed photovoltaic 
power generation, investment stability is good. Most importantly, 
the sewage treatment plant electrical energy consumption is large, 
on 24-hour non-stop operation. Photovoltaic power generation 
in the daytime peak load period using the “self-generation and 
self-consumption” approach. The power load of the photovoltaic 
power station is directly borne by the sewage treatment plant, on 
the one hand, to reduce the impact on the quality of electricity 
in the grid when the business disputes with the power operating 
company. On the other hand, it can make full use of the national 
policy subsidies for new energy distributed power generation and 
reduce the cost of electricity. Therefore, the use of PV distributed 
power generation has a high-power generation efficiency and 
can seek preferential subsidies from the government in terms of 
policy, and can also achieve the environmental benefits of zero 
emissions and improve the image of the enterprise in taking social 
responsibility.
PV and urban construction complement each other as a 
new trend
With the double carbon target, all kinds of PV projects are 
competing to help add to the energy saving and environmental 
protection of cities to reduce carbon. The application of PV is 
becoming more and more widespread, turning energy saving into 
creating energy, which is becoming part of modern life. Examples 
include photovoltaic seating, photovoltaic factories, shopping 
mall roofs, villa roofs and photovoltaic street lights, billboards 
and carports. Photovoltaic seating in urban public space is an 
indispensable facility, mainly to provide a comfortable play space 
for the public. With the gradual improvement of people’s living 
standards, the quality of life has gradually become an important 
value choice, and comfort has also become one of the evaluation 
standards.
The photovoltaic seat applies solar power generation to the 
leisure seat, which means that the comfort of the seat is enhanced 
and the urban environment is beautified; solar power generation 
is used as the electricity supply and the seat is equipped with a 
USB port to provide convenient charging services.
The night photovoltaic lighting is shown in..., using a high 
luminous efficiency light source lighting design, time control 
plus light control. The effect shows high brightness and quick 
installation. There is no need to lay cables, no consumption of 
traditional energy, long service life and so on. The society actively 
advocate the use of green energy products, and emphasise the art 
lamp landscape and scenic surroundings, historical and cultural 
harmony. It is commonly used in industrial parks, squares, 
parks, pedestrian streets and other places for night lighting and 
landscape illumination.
The photovoltaic sunflower is the shape of a sunflower petal, 
visually giving a beautiful high value, and is also referred to as the 
photovoltaic sunflower. Space is efficiently used in order to install 
photovoltaic power generation systems. It is one of the ecological 
and technological landscapes with environmental characteristics 
in modern parks, scenic spots and agricultural sightseeing parks. 
It is a highly intelligent combination of power generation, energy 
storage, environmental protection, aesthetics and technology, 
and is also used in parks, photovoltaic gardens and agricultural 
tourism parks. Each “photovoltaic flower” has a single installed 
capacity of 2600W, and with the energy storage system, it can 
provide sustainable green power energy for the surrounding 
landscape equipment during the day, and can also supply power 
to itself and the surrounding equipment at night through the 
configured energy storage system.
The photovoltaic advertising bin, is a clever combination 
of advertising media and a bin, which consists of a solar panel, 
a separate waste collection bin and an advertising light box. The 
sorting bin can prompt visitors or the public to sort and put it 
away to achieve the purpose of recycling waste materials.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330019
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Photovoltaic advertising light boxes can generally be used 
as a means of promoting commercial advertising or public 
service advertising, achieving the dual communication effect of 
public service promotion and economic benefits. By collecting 
solar energy and converting it into electrical energy, the solar 
photovoltaic panel can provide electrical energy for the light box 
lighting system at night, which can reduce energy consumption and 
can be used for 3 to 5 days of lighting. As a new scenario product 
using solar power generation, it has solved the installation and 
safety problems of outdoor light box power wiring, and has also 
reduced power supply for environmental protection and energy 
conservation construction of the city, which will add a new street 
view to the future city.
The photovoltaic carport is a simple and easy-to-use 
application scenario that combines a building with photovoltaics. 
Making full use of existing sites, it is cost effective and quick to 
install, and has become increasingly popular in recent years. 
Placing the PV module on top of the carport generates electricity 
and also provides protection from rain and sun. Such carports 
using photovoltaic power generation can be equipped with 
energy storage. After the installation of charging piles for new 
energy vehicle charging, the surplus electricity can also be grid-
connected to make money [1-40].
Summary and Outlook of this Paper
Conclusion
The photovoltaic industry is the most advantageous 
renewable energy source in the future due to its ability to 
generate clean energy, large resource storage capacity, and 
environmental friendliness and greenness. This paper starts 
with an analysis of the current situation and development of the 
renewable energy and photovoltaic industry, and then begins with 
a study of the key issues of environmental pollution that have 
often been criticised in the photovoltaic industry chain over the 
years. In addition, improvement measures and suggestions for 
the pollution and management research situation are proposed, 
and finally a predictive analysis of the future development trend 
of the photovoltaic industry is made. The main conclusions are as 
follows.
Firstly, photovoltaic power generation has great positive 
significance for environmental protection, and the development of 
the photovoltaic industry allows the environment to be improved, 
and the future is promising.
Secondly, in the development of the photovoltaic industry, we 
need to take a comprehensive, objective and scientific view of its 
positive role in environmental protection, reflect on the pollution 
problems in the industry chain, and improve the strengths and 
weaknesses of the positive solutions. Environmental protection 
requires the PV industry to be guided by scientific policies, a 
reasonable regional layout, and an orderly and coordinated 
development according to local conditions.
Thirdly, the management of the PV industry needs to be 
more sophisticated, and the focus of management needs to 
be on environmental protection, pollution prevention and the 
construction of management teams.
At last, greater efforts can be made in the future by relying on 
new technological breakthroughs in the PV industry, supervision 
and management, and long-term regional planning in terms of 
environmental protection.
Outlook
The future of the PV industry in terms of environmental 
protection can also be explored in depth in the following places.
First, photovoltaic power generation is a process that relies 
on the light of the sky to supply energy, which makes it impossible 
for photovoltaic facilities to continue to play their role in 
environmental protection in an environment where there is not 
enough light. And their effectiveness in environmental protection 
needs to be improved. In other words, it is worth studying the 
new idea of “making good use of existing equipment and creating 
colourful environmental protection values” .
Second, photovoltaic power generation requires energy 
storage. The energy storage technology has not been effective 
broken through. Making a deep breakthrough in energy storage 
and solving long-distance transmission across regions and 
countries has great historical and strategic significance for 
protecting the ecological environment and is worth becoming a 
research hotspot in the future.
Third, crystalline silicon, the core raw material of photovoltaic 
panels, has a far-reaching impact on environmental pollution. 
In the future, scientists can make research in new materials 
and explore more environmentally friendly and green raw 
materials to replace them, which can become a new direction for 
environmental research.
References
1. Qianmiao Y, Ran H, Hui T (2022) Research on Design Trend of Solar 
Photovoltaic High-rise Residential Buildings Based on Future Climate 
from the Perspective of Carbon Neutralization. Industrial buildings, pp. 
1-13.
2. Qingqing M, Chunyan S, Xiangping Z (2022) Photovoltaic Power 
Generation Technology under Carbon Neutralization Target. Progress 
in Chemical Industry 41(03).
3. Simin L (2021) Talking about Photovoltaic Power Generation from 
Carbon Peak and Carbon Neutralization. Rural Electrician 29(11): 10-
11.
4. Bo D, Chengying S (2022) Reflections on Photovoltaic Power 
Generation Industry Chain. Qinghai Finance 2022(03): 29-32.
5. Naijun R (2021) Analysis on the Impact of Solar Photovoltaic Power 
Station on Environment. Management and Technology of Small and 
Medium-sized Enterprises (Xiaxun Journal) 2021(04).
6. Chunlei H (2022) Discussion on Current Situation and Development 
of Solar Photovoltaic Power Generation Technology. Light Source and 
Lighting 2022(03): 95-97.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in China-
Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330020
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
7. Hua J (2022) Forecast of Future Development Trend of Photovoltaic 
Power Generation Technology. Solar Energy 2022(01): 5-13.
8. Weipeng L, Yingkun L, Lize Q (2022) Exploration and Practice of 
Distributed Photovoltaic Grid Connection. China Electric Power 
Enterprise Management 2022(17): 34-35.
9. Fubin H, Wenjing L, Chuanmin S (2022) Policy Effects of Photovoltaic 
Poverty Alleviation on Rural Revitalization. Resource Science 44(01): 
32-46.
10. Ying L, Linmao Z (2022) Problems in the Development of Rural 
Photovoltaic Power Generation in China and Legal Suggestions. Public 
Electricity 37(02): 14-16.
11. Ganxiang J, Lei C (2022) Photovoltaic Blue “Enables” Ecological Green. 
Zibo Daily, 2022-06-07(002).
12. Chan C (2022) Application of Surface Photovoltaic Power Generation 
in Ecological Environment Management. Comprehensive Utilization of 
Resources in China 40(04): 45-47.
13. Yongzhong W (2022) Carbon Peak, Carbon Neutralization Target and 
China’s New Energy Revolution. Social Science Abstracts, 2022(01).
14. Minmin M (2021) Intelligent Defect Detection of Silicon Photovoltaic 
Cells and Components Based on Deep Learning. Hunan University, 
China.
15. Action Plan for Innovation and Development of Intelligent Photovoltaic 
Industry (2021-2025). China Nonferrous Metals, 2022(03).
16. Xue Z (2022) Research on Photovoltaic-based Composite Ice Storage 
Energy Storage System. Jilin University, China.
17. Yang Ge (2022) China will basically complete the construction of 
intelligent photovoltaic industry ecosystem in 2025. Electromechanical 
Business Daily, 2022-01-10(A06).
18. Yang Hui et al. (2021) Research on Environmental Pollution Problems 
and Countermeasures of Solar Photovoltaic Industry in Heilongjiang 
Province. Journal of East China University of Technology (Social 
Science Edition) 40(01).
19. Takamatsu (2022) Environmental Protection Strategies for 
Photovoltaic Industry Development. Comprehensive Utilization of 
Resources in China 40(02).
20. Shuo C, Tqiang Z (2021) Research on Pollution Control of Solid Waste 
in Full Life Cycle of Photovoltaic Power Station. Electric World 62(12): 
17-19.
21. Dong Y (2021) Analysis on Pollution and Effective Prevention of Solar 
Photovoltaic Industry. Resource Conservation and Environmental 
Protection, 2021(04).
22. (2022) Environmental Risk of Abandoned Photovoltaic Panels. Energy 
and Energy Conservation 2021(03): 66.
23. Xia Xiaotong (2022) “Lin Guang Complementarity”: Exploration of 
Kubuqi Desert Management. Sichuan Environment 41(01): 175-179.
24. Hongbin W (2022) System Problems and Solutions of Photovoltaic 
Power Generation Connected to Intelligent Distribution Network. 
Light Source and Lighting 2022(03): 104-106.
25. Mengjing H (2022) Principle and Modeling Analysis of New 
Agricultural-Optical Complementary Square Matrix Using Filter 
Film and Reflective Effect. Chinese Journal of Agricultural Machinery 
43(03): 127-131.
26. Hongwei W, Xueting Z, Chenxi Y (2022) Research on the Development 
of China’s Photovoltaic Industry and the Impact of Electricity Price 
Subsidy Policy. Quantitative Economic and Technical Economic 
Research 39(07).
27. Liye X, Jiaofeng P (2022) Suggestions on Constructing Wide-area 
Virtual Power Plant Based on Photovoltaic Power Generation and 
Physical Energy Storage. Proceedings of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences 37(04).
28. Jianbin Lu C, Luo H, Rongsheng L, Yanping Z (2022) Research on 
Technology and Industrialization of Intelligent Photovoltaic Modules 
Based on Fast Grid-connected Power Generation. Energy Saving and 
Environmental Protection 7(4).
29. Madandan, Jiahao H, Xin H (2022) Research on the Quality of 
Photovoltaic Industry Policy during the 14th. China Market 2022(20): 
82-84.
30. Xinyu H, Wen C (2022) Application Status and Development Prospect of 
Photovoltaic Building Integration (BIPV). Journal of Civil Engineering 
and Management, pp. 1-7.
31. Jie S, Qiaomu Y, Jian L, Pengcheng T (2022) Talking about the 
Environmental Impact of Sewage Produced by Photovoltaic Panel 
Cleaning and Its Enlightenment. Cleaning the World 38(05): 47-49.
32. (2022) The Department of Energy Saving and Comprehensive 
Utilization organized an exchange meeting on the recycling of waste 
photovoltaic modules. Renewable Resources and Circular Economy 
15(05): 35.
33. Fang Z, Jun Z (2022) Difficulties and Countermeasures for High Quality 
Development of China’s Photovoltaic Industry under the “Double 
Carbon” Goal. Journal of Xichang University (Social Science Edition) 
34(02).
34. Xiaowei G, Peng H (2022) Patent Technology Analysis of Polyolefin 
Photovoltaic Backplane in China. China Science and Technology 
Information 2022(14).
35. Heping Z (2022) Development Status and Prospect of New Energy 
Technology under Double Carbon Background. Modern chemical 
industry: 1-4.
36. Lianbing X (2022) Research on the Prospect and Development Strategy 
of Hydrogen Energy Utilization in China. Clean Coal Technology, pp. 
1-11.
37. Guo CX (2022) Experts predict that the photovoltaic building 
integration industry will usher in a “big explosion” in 2023. Energy 
Saving and Environmental Protection 2022(01).
38. Jian Y, Haoran Y, Tengjuan X, Yang C, Cheng Q, et al. (2022) New 
Opportunities for Photovoltaic Development and Its Application in 
Energy Networks under the “Double Carbon” Goal. Oil, Gas and New 
Energy 34(03).
39. Ling Z, Xia Y, Zhihui W, Sicong M (2022) Analysis of the Development 
Prospect of Photovoltaic Industry under the Background of “Double 
Carbon” . Value Engineering 41(13): 162-164.
40. Dan Z (2021) The Development History of China’s Photovoltaic 
Industry. Chinese and Foreign Energy 26(11): 33.
How to cite this article: Lei MA, Qingwen LI, Xiaojuan LI, Juan Xu and Zhaobin LI. The Impact of Renewable Energy on Environmental Protection in 
China-Taking Solar PV as an Example. Int J Environ Sci Nat Res. 2023; 32(1): 556330. DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330021
International Journal of Environmental Sciences & Natural Resources
Your next submission with Juniper Publishers 
 will reach you the below assets
• Quality Editorial service
• Swift Peer Review
• Reprints availability
• E-prints Service
• Manuscript Podcast for convenient understanding
• Global attainment for your research
• Manuscript accessibility in different formats 
 ( Pdf, E-pub, Full Text, Audio) 
• Unceasing customer service
Track the below URL for one-step submission 
 https://juniperpublishers.com/online-submission.php
This work is licensed under Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 License
DOI: 10.19080/IJESNR.2023.32.556330