Introduction Accurate mapping and developing reliable and robust methods derived from remote sensing data are vital in effectively monitoring the status of water quality in inland water bodies in order to protect and manage water resources. The spatial and temporal concentration levels of water quality indicators are essential in providing useful information about the health of the aquatic ecosystems. However, conventional in-situ data collections tools and methods that are used for monitoring water quality parameters concentrations in inland water bodies are cumbersome, necessitating the development of a simple, efficient, and cost-effective monitoring system. Methods This study sought to assess the spatial and temporal variations of optically active and inactive water quality parameters in the Palawani dam in Province of Matebeleland South in Zimbabwe based on Sentinel-2 Multispectral Instrument (MSI) satellite data and field-based water sample analysis between 2018, 2020 and 2022. Water quality parameters considered in this study included the Turbidity (TB), Total Suspended Matter (TSM), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Chlorophyll-a (Chl-a). Results The research findings of the study showed that the Turbidity, Total Suspended Matter (TSM), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) were spatially distributed differently but more pronounced in 2020 than in 2018 and 2022. Furthermore, Turbidity, Total Suspended Matter, Total Nitrogen and Chlorophyll a were more concentrated in the northern parts and in the edges, banks and tributaries of the dam. While the other water quality parameters in the Palawani dam were within permissible limits or thresholds, the results of the study showed that the average turbidity levels in the dam in 2020 exceeded the recommended limits. Discussion The proposed research methodology used in this study can facilitate the effective spatiotemporal monitoring of water quality concentrations, specifically in remote and semi-arid regions where in-situ measurements or field water sampling techniques are not feasible, expensive, labour-intensive, and time-consuming. The study results have significant implications for the conservation and management of water resources of inland water bodies in data constrained areas.