Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs
 - Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main navigation 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact & Help 
 Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search content at Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Research units 
 
 
 
 Research output 
 
 
 
 Datasets 
 
 
 
 Projects 
 
 
 
 Press/Media 
 
 
 
 Activities 
 
 
 
 Prizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs 
 Xi Li * , Shengda Wang , Weijun Song , Bastiaan W. Ibelings , Yiruo Xia , Miquel Lürling , Nesrine Imene Hame , Hichem Nasri , Viktor A. Gabyshev , Andrey Yu Krasnopeev , Olga I. Belykh , Na Lin , Fengzhuang Lin , Qijin Chen * Corresponding author for this work 
 WIMEK Aquatic Ecology and Water Quality Management 
 
 Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 Cyanobacterial blooms can threaten water supply safety worldwide. Previous studies have employed various chemical treatments (e.g., natural/modified clays, oxidants) for cyanobacterial bloom control when blooms were already clearly visible with high biomass. However, the early/initiation stages of blooms have been ignored, with a lower-biomass and a higher sensitivity to chemicals agents. In this study, we used a novel approach: low-dosage chlorine, combined with bentonite, applied at the early bloom stage for bloom control in a deep drinking water Reservoir Kengkou. Then, cyanobacterial biomass, water quality parameters, and micro-eukaryotic community were analyzed before and after the treatment. Results showed that the optimized combined treatment using extremely low-dosage of chlorine (0.002 mg/L) and bentonite (0.2 mg/L), effectively eliminated the cyanobacterial bloom through flocculation-settling removal and photosynthetic inactivation. Total and dissolved cyanotoxins risk did not occur after the treatment. Meanwhile, the water quality significantly improved following the treatment, including a decrease in pH, turbidity, and chemical oxygen demand (COD). The α-diversity of the micro-eukaryotic community increased by 11.5% after seven weeks, and the relative abundance of Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Bacillariophyta, increased by 2.7, 2.4, and 6.3-folds respectively, implying the successful ecological restoration following the treatment. Overall, the application of low-dosage combined chlorine and bentonite could be a promising approach for cyanobacterial bloom control in the early stage, and with significant environmental and ecological benefits. 
 Original language English Article number 143280 Journal Journal of Hazardous Materials Volume 516 DOIs https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 Publication status Published - 15 Sept 2026 
 
 
 
 
 UN SDGs 
 This output contributes to the following UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SDG 6 
 Clean Water and Sanitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Keywords Chlorine Cyanobacterial bloom Early stage Micro-eukaryotic community Natural clay Water quality 
 
 
 
 Access to Document 
 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 https://edepot.wur.nl/723124 Licence: Taverne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 Dive into the research topics of 'Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bentonite 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chlorine 
 Pharmacology, Toxicology and Pharmaceutical Science 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Low Drug Dose 
 Immunology and Microbiology 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Water Quality 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 50% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Turbidity 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Potable Water 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Oxidant 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ecological Restoration 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 25% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View full fingerprint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this 
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 Author
 
 
 
 BIBTEX
 
 
 
 Harvard
 
 
 
 Standard
 
 
 
 RIS
 
 
 
 Vancouver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Li, X., Wang, S., Song, W., Ibelings, B. W., Xia, Y. , Lürling, M. , Hame, N. I., Nasri, H., Gabyshev, V. A., Krasnopeev, A. Y., Belykh, O. I., Lin, N., Lin, F., & Chen, Q. (2026). Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs . Journal of Hazardous Materials , 516 , Article 143280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 
 
 
 
 Li, Xi ; Wang, Shengda ; Song, Weijun et al. / Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs . In: Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2026 ; Vol. 516. 
 
 
 
 @article{afc70463f25644bf828146089e94f007, title = "Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs", abstract = "Cyanobacterial blooms can threaten water supply safety worldwide. Previous studies have employed various chemical treatments (e.g., natural/modified clays, oxidants) for cyanobacterial bloom control when blooms were already clearly visible with high biomass. However, the early/initiation stages of blooms have been ignored, with a lower-biomass and a higher sensitivity to chemicals agents. In this study, we used a novel approach: low-dosage chlorine, combined with bentonite, applied at the early bloom stage for bloom control in a deep drinking water Reservoir Kengkou. Then, cyanobacterial biomass, water quality parameters, and micro-eukaryotic community were analyzed before and after the treatment. Results showed that the optimized combined treatment using extremely low-dosage of chlorine (0.002 mg/L) and bentonite (0.2 mg/L), effectively eliminated the cyanobacterial bloom through flocculation-settling removal and photosynthetic inactivation. Total and dissolved cyanotoxins risk did not occur after the treatment. Meanwhile, the water quality significantly improved following the treatment, including a decrease in pH, turbidity, and chemical oxygen demand (COD). The α-diversity of the micro-eukaryotic community increased by 11.5\% after seven weeks, and the relative abundance of Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Bacillariophyta, increased by 2.7, 2.4, and 6.3-folds respectively, implying the successful ecological restoration following the treatment. Overall, the application of low-dosage combined chlorine and bentonite could be a promising approach for cyanobacterial bloom control in the early stage, and with significant environmental and ecological benefits.", keywords = "Chlorine, Cyanobacterial bloom, Early stage, Micro-eukaryotic community, Natural clay, Water quality", author = "Xi Li and Shengda Wang and Weijun Song and Ibelings, \{Bastiaan W.\} and Yiruo Xia and Miquel L{\"u}rling and Hame, \{Nesrine Imene\} and Hichem Nasri and Gabyshev, \{Viktor A.\} and Krasnopeev, \{Andrey Yu\} and Belykh, \{Olga I.\} and Na Lin and Fengzhuang Lin and Qijin Chen", year = "2026", month = sep, day = "15", doi = "10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280", language = "English", volume = "516", journal = "Journal of Hazardous Materials", issn = "0304-3894", publisher = "Elsevier", } 
 
 
 
 Li, X, Wang, S, Song, W, Ibelings, BW, Xia, Y , Lürling, M , Hame, NI, Nasri, H, Gabyshev, VA, Krasnopeev, AY, Belykh, OI, Lin, N, Lin, F & Chen, Q 2026, ' Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs ', Journal of Hazardous Materials , vol. 516, 143280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 
 
 
 
 Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs. / Li, Xi; Wang, Shengda; Song, Weijun et al. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials , Vol. 516, 143280, 15.09.2026. Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 TY - JOUR T1 - Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs AU - Li, Xi AU - Wang, Shengda AU - Song, Weijun AU - Ibelings, Bastiaan W. AU - Xia, Yiruo AU - Lürling, Miquel AU - Hame, Nesrine Imene AU - Nasri, Hichem AU - Gabyshev, Viktor A. AU - Krasnopeev, Andrey Yu AU - Belykh, Olga I. AU - Lin, Na AU - Lin, Fengzhuang AU - Chen, Qijin PY - 2026/9/15 Y1 - 2026/9/15 N2 - Cyanobacterial blooms can threaten water supply safety worldwide. Previous studies have employed various chemical treatments (e.g., natural/modified clays, oxidants) for cyanobacterial bloom control when blooms were already clearly visible with high biomass. However, the early/initiation stages of blooms have been ignored, with a lower-biomass and a higher sensitivity to chemicals agents. In this study, we used a novel approach: low-dosage chlorine, combined with bentonite, applied at the early bloom stage for bloom control in a deep drinking water Reservoir Kengkou. Then, cyanobacterial biomass, water quality parameters, and micro-eukaryotic community were analyzed before and after the treatment. Results showed that the optimized combined treatment using extremely low-dosage of chlorine (0.002 mg/L) and bentonite (0.2 mg/L), effectively eliminated the cyanobacterial bloom through flocculation-settling removal and photosynthetic inactivation. Total and dissolved cyanotoxins risk did not occur after the treatment. Meanwhile, the water quality significantly improved following the treatment, including a decrease in pH, turbidity, and chemical oxygen demand (COD). The α-diversity of the micro-eukaryotic community increased by 11.5% after seven weeks, and the relative abundance of Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Bacillariophyta, increased by 2.7, 2.4, and 6.3-folds respectively, implying the successful ecological restoration following the treatment. Overall, the application of low-dosage combined chlorine and bentonite could be a promising approach for cyanobacterial bloom control in the early stage, and with significant environmental and ecological benefits. AB - Cyanobacterial blooms can threaten water supply safety worldwide. Previous studies have employed various chemical treatments (e.g., natural/modified clays, oxidants) for cyanobacterial bloom control when blooms were already clearly visible with high biomass. However, the early/initiation stages of blooms have been ignored, with a lower-biomass and a higher sensitivity to chemicals agents. In this study, we used a novel approach: low-dosage chlorine, combined with bentonite, applied at the early bloom stage for bloom control in a deep drinking water Reservoir Kengkou. Then, cyanobacterial biomass, water quality parameters, and micro-eukaryotic community were analyzed before and after the treatment. Results showed that the optimized combined treatment using extremely low-dosage of chlorine (0.002 mg/L) and bentonite (0.2 mg/L), effectively eliminated the cyanobacterial bloom through flocculation-settling removal and photosynthetic inactivation. Total and dissolved cyanotoxins risk did not occur after the treatment. Meanwhile, the water quality significantly improved following the treatment, including a decrease in pH, turbidity, and chemical oxygen demand (COD). The α-diversity of the micro-eukaryotic community increased by 11.5% after seven weeks, and the relative abundance of Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Bacillariophyta, increased by 2.7, 2.4, and 6.3-folds respectively, implying the successful ecological restoration following the treatment. Overall, the application of low-dosage combined chlorine and bentonite could be a promising approach for cyanobacterial bloom control in the early stage, and with significant environmental and ecological benefits. KW - Chlorine KW - Cyanobacterial bloom KW - Early stage KW - Micro-eukaryotic community KW - Natural clay KW - Water quality U2 - 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 DO - 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 M3 - Article C2 - 42648184 AN - SCOPUS:105048232129 SN - 0304-3894 VL - 516 JO - Journal of Hazardous Materials JF - Journal of Hazardous Materials M1 - 143280 ER - 
 
 
 
 Li X, Wang S, Song W, Ibelings BW, Xia Y , Lürling M et al. Early-stage targeted low-dose chlorine-bentonite treatment for cyanobacterial bloom control in deep reservoirs . Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2026 Sept 15;516:143280. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143280 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Powered by Pure Link opens in a new tab , Scopus Link opens in a new tab & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine&trade; Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 All content on this site: Copyright &copy; 2026 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply
 
 We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research data protection policy Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 About web accessibility Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report vulnerability Link opens in a new tab