Since its discovery in the late 1950s, metathesis has been an important reaction in the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, perfumes and even insect pheromones. Multiple industrial processes such as the Shell Higher Olefin Process (SHOP) and the Olefin Conversion Technology (OCT) also depend on this reaction. In 2005, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Yves Chauvin for proposing the nowadays widely accepted metathesis reaction mechanism, and to Robert H. Grubbs and Richard R. Schrock for their development of efficient catalysts. Since the 1950s, plastic production also started to boom. Plastic has since then become such an important and ubiquitous material due to its low cost, lightweight, versatility and durability. Currently, it has its use in almost every part of our lives and functions for example as packaging material for food and goods, as medical equipment in lifesaving operations and as building material. However, the way we deal with it at the end of its life has now become problematic. Most of the plastic is burnt for energy or ends up in the environment where it has devastating effects on our ecosystems. Only a small part is effectively recycled. The introductory Chapter 1 starts with some basic concepts related to the most important types of polymers and delves more deeply into the lifecycle of plastic. Further on in this chapter, the catalysts, reaction types and mechanisms of metathesis are introduced. The metathesis reaction, more specifically cross-metathesis (CM), plays a central role in all the following chapters of this thesis. It is used to break the -C=C- double bonds in the backbone of the obtained unsaturated polyolefins (UPOs) to form α,&omega;-difunctionalized olefins. These products are useful intermediates for the synthesis of monomers and fine chemicals. In the final part of this chapter, an overview of the recent literature on the metathetical recycling of polybutadiene rubber (PBR) and polyethylene (PE) is provided. In Chapter 2, the first experimental chapter, a hydrogenation-metathesis protocol that first partially hydrogenates high molecular weight (HMW) PBR and afterwards splits it selectively into α,&omega;-dienes and α,&omega;-diesters is developed. By first avoiding isomerization side reactions during ethenolysis, the effect of isomerization during hydrogenation can be studied. It is shown that hydrogenation under high H2 pressure, at low temperature and with low catalyst loading proceeds with minimal double bond isomerization. This is evidenced by formation of only α,&omega;-dienes with specific carbon numbers of C4n+2 (n=1-5), which are detected by GC and GCMS. However, in case of hydrogenation under lower H2 pressure, at increased temperature and with higher catalyst loading, it is shown that the distribution of α,&omega;-dienes after ethenolysis contains all carbon numbers Cn (n=6-22). Not only isomerization, but also the hydrogenation degree is noted to have a decisive influence on the product distribu