This paper examines the symbolic representation of folklore in Dust (Owuor, 2014), Kintu (Makumbi, 2018), and The First Woman (Makumbi, The First Woman, 2020), which comprise the primary texts for this study. The study contends that symbolic folklore knowledge by the contemporary African writer has been neglected, given that most people assume that the use of symbolic folklore is a preserve of the old. The study wishes to assert that the modern writer uses symbolic folklore to communicate important societal truths just like the old writers have done. Equally, it is presumed that the texts under study have not attracted critical attention to the subject of the representation of symbolic folklore. The objectives of this study are to interrogate the symbolic meanings deduced from the folklore material in the aforementioned primary texts. The study hypothesises that there is symbolic meaning in the folklore material employed in Dust (Owuor, Dust, 2014), Kintu (Makumbi, Kintu, 2018) and The First Woman (Makumbi, The First Woman, 2020). The study is both based on and limited to the reading of the three texts, in line with the aforementioned objectives. The methodology of data analysis and collection involves reading and re-reading the three texts, writing the findings based on the set objectives of this study and giving the data personal interpretation as guided by the objectives. This study is informed by the structural theory in anthropology/social anthropology, which is traced to the work of Levi-Strauss. Other proponents for this theory include Roman Jakobson from the Prague school of linguistics and Marcel Mauss. According to this theory, meaning is produced and reproduced within a culture through various practices, phenomena and activities that serve as systems of signification. The literature review has been done on symbolic meanings deduced from folklore in the African novel. The method of data collection involved a close reading of the primary and secondary texts. Given that this is a library research, the study is based on a descriptive research design, which involves analysis and interpretation of qualitative data. The target population is limited to all aspects of folklore. The study employs an in-depth analysis of qualitative data. The findings from this study will be of great benefit to the field of literary criticism, in particular, in that they will add to the knowledge of the representation of symbolic folklore in fiction, and secondly, the study will shed more light on the customs and cultural beliefs of the people from East Africa where the novels are set. The study findings reveal that there are aspects of custom that are used to represent symbolic folklore in the four primary novels. From the study findings, we note that traditionally, twins are considered a bad omen, and thus they are considered outcasts in society. Polygamy is allowed in a traditional society, greedy among those in leadership roles leads to chaos in the state.