Satellite evidence for pervasive water eutrophication in the Doce River reservoirs following the collapse of the Fundao dam in Brazil 
 
 
 
 
 Pular para o conteúdo principal
 Comunidades & Coleções Tudo no Repositório Estatísticas Português do Brasil English Español Entrar Entrar pela Central de Acessos Entrar com o ORCID Início Produção acadêmica e científica Artigo São José dos Campos - ICT - Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia Satellite evidence for pervasive water eutrophication in the Doce River reservoirs following the collapse of the Fundao dam in Brazil Satellite evidence for pervasive water eutrophication in the Doce River reservoirs following the collapse of the Fundao dam in Brazil Carregando... Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116014 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116014 Data 2021-03-01 Autores Oliveira Coimbra, Keyla Thayrinne Alcantara, Enner Souza Filho, Carlos Roberto de Orientador Coorientador Pós-graduação Curso de graduação Título da Revista ISSN da Revista Título de Volume Editor Elsevier B.V. Elsevier Tipo Artigo Direito de acesso Acesso aberto Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116014 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.116014 Resumo One of the worst socio-environmental disasters to mark the history of Brazil and the world occurred in November 2015 and involved the mining sector. The collapse of the Fundao dam released approximately 43 million m(3) of iron ore tailings, which moved downstream to reach the Doce River. This resulted in the contamination of water, soil, and sediments along the entire course of the river, which also affected its mouth in the Atlantic Ocean. Four years after the disaster, several socio-environmental problems continue to persist in the affected areas. In this context, the reservoirs built along the Doce River deserve special attention as they are artificial environments that are highly vulnerable to changes in water parameters. This study aims to determine water quality indicators of these reservoirs using remote sensing data and image processing methods, including semi-analytical algorithms, to comprehend the progress of eutrophication processes. Operational land imager/Landsat-8 data (from 2013 to 2019) were used to map the suspended particulate matter (SPM), euphotic zone (Z(eu)) and chlorophyll-a (Chl-a) before and after the collapse. The results showed significant changes in SPM and Z(eu) in the reservoirs after the collapse. Non-conformity of these parameters is observed even now, and they tend to intensify during rainy periods when resuspension processes of sediments occur. Moreover, there has been an increase in the eutrophication of reservoirs as noticed by the significant increase in Chl-a after the disaster, especially in January, July, and August. (C) 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Mostrar mais Descrição Palavras-chave Eutrophication Fundao tailings dam collapse Doce river reservoirs Idioma Inglês Citação Environmental Pollution. Oxford: Elsevier Sci Ltd, v. 272, 11 p., 2021. URI http://hdl.handle.net/11449/209185 Itens relacionados Financiadores Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) Coleções São José dos Campos - ICT - Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia Unidades Carregando... Tipo de item: Unidade , São José dos Campos, Instituto de Ciência e Tecnologia - ICT ICT Mostrar mais Campus: São José dos Campos Mostrar mais Departamentos Cursos de graduação Programas de pós-graduação Estatísticas de acesso
 Página do item completo Outras formas de acesso doi Web of Science Dimensions Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" Configurações de cookies Configurações de acessibilidade Política de privacidade Sobre o Repositório Institucional UNESP Perguntas frequentes (FAQ) Enviar uma sugestão