Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia
 - Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main navigation 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact & Help 
 Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search content at Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Research units 
 
 
 
 Research output 
 
 
 
 Datasets 
 
 
 
 Projects 
 
 
 
 Press/Media 
 
 
 
 Activities 
 
 
 
 Prizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia 
 Ke Liu , Yuxi Gong , Suli Zhi * , Siyuan Min , Xiaoyu Xu , Han Wang , Jiahua Liu , Yuang Cao , Lukas Matthias Trebuch , Shizhou Shen , Keqiang Zhang * Corresponding author for this work 
 Bio Process Engineering 
 
 Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 This study investigated synergistic pollutant removal and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) reduction by consortia of Bacillus licheniformis with Chlorella or Synechocystis. Using the initial algal-to-bacterial cell ratio as the primary variable, we evaluated growth, microbial community, pollutant removal, and ARG distribution across the water phase, algal cells, and extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) layers. B. licheniformis enhanced total algal biomass and absolute photosynthetic pigment production, while the ratio significantly influenced specific pigment, protein, and polysaccharide contents per unit biomass, indicating distinct resource allocation strategies. Both consortia efficiently removed nutrients, performing best at a low ratio of 1:3, which also differentially shaped microbial communities and their functions within soluble (S-EPS), loosely bound (LB-EPS), and tightly bound (TB-EPS) EPS. ARGs showed pronounced spatial partitioning: in the aqueous phase, monofunctional resistance genes were substantially reduced, whereas multidrug resistance and regulatory genes were enriched. Across compartments, Chlorella accumulated ARGs in the middle EPS layer (LB-EPS > S-EPS > TB-EPS), whereas Synechocystis enriched the inner layer (TB-EPS > LB-EPS > S-EPS) with higher intracellular abundance, with Chlorella showing greater stability in ARG regulation. These findings identify spatial partitioning as a key determinant of ARG fate in algal–bacterial consortia, guiding safer wastewater treatment design. 
 Original language English Article number 143477 Journal Journal of Hazardous Materials Volume 517 DOIs https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 Publication status Published - 1 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 Keywords Algae–bacteria ratio Antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) extracellular polymeric substance Livestock wastewater treatment Microalgae 
 
 
 
 Access to Document 
 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 https://edepot.wur.nl/723858 Licence: Taverne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 Dive into the research topics of 'Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cyanobacteria 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Antibiotic Resistance 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Bacterium 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Antibiotic Resistance Gene 
 Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Extracellular Polymeric Substance 
 Immunology and Microbiology 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Antibiotic Resistance Genes 
 Chemical Engineering 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Chlorella 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 60% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Photosynthetic Pigment 
 Agricultural and Biological Sciences 
 40% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View full fingerprint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this 
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 Author
 
 
 
 BIBTEX
 
 
 
 Harvard
 
 
 
 Standard
 
 
 
 RIS
 
 
 
 Vancouver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Liu, K., Gong, Y., Zhi, S., Min, S., Xu, X., Wang, H., Liu, J., Cao, Y., Trebuch, L. M., Shen, S., & Zhang, K. (2026). Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia . Journal of Hazardous Materials , 517 , Article 143477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 
 
 
 
 Liu, Ke ; Gong, Yuxi ; Zhi, Suli et al. / Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia . In: Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2026 ; Vol. 517. 
 
 
 
 @article{fa2c74c2d87f41109f2a638b42bf24d7, title = "Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia", abstract = "This study investigated synergistic pollutant removal and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) reduction by consortia of Bacillus licheniformis with Chlorella or Synechocystis. Using the initial algal-to-bacterial cell ratio as the primary variable, we evaluated growth, microbial community, pollutant removal, and ARG distribution across the water phase, algal cells, and extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) layers. B. licheniformis enhanced total algal biomass and absolute photosynthetic pigment production, while the ratio significantly influenced specific pigment, protein, and polysaccharide contents per unit biomass, indicating distinct resource allocation strategies. Both consortia efficiently removed nutrients, performing best at a low ratio of 1:3, which also differentially shaped microbial communities and their functions within soluble (S-EPS), loosely bound (LB-EPS), and tightly bound (TB-EPS) EPS. ARGs showed pronounced spatial partitioning: in the aqueous phase, monofunctional resistance genes were substantially reduced, whereas multidrug resistance and regulatory genes were enriched. Across compartments, Chlorella accumulated ARGs in the middle EPS layer (LB-EPS > S-EPS > TB-EPS), whereas Synechocystis enriched the inner layer (TB-EPS > LB-EPS > S-EPS) with higher intracellular abundance, with Chlorella showing greater stability in ARG regulation. These findings identify spatial partitioning as a key determinant of ARG fate in algal–bacterial consortia, guiding safer wastewater treatment design.", keywords = "Algae–bacteria ratio, Antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), extracellular polymeric substance, Livestock wastewater treatment, Microalgae", author = "Ke Liu and Yuxi Gong and Suli Zhi and Siyuan Min and Xiaoyu Xu and Han Wang and Jiahua Liu and Yuang Cao and Trebuch, \{Lukas Matthias\} and Shizhou Shen and Keqiang Zhang", year = "2026", month = oct, day = "1", doi = "10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477", language = "English", volume = "517", journal = "Journal of Hazardous Materials", issn = "0304-3894", publisher = "Elsevier", } 
 
 
 
 Liu, K, Gong, Y, Zhi, S, Min, S, Xu, X, Wang, H, Liu, J, Cao, Y, Trebuch, LM, Shen, S & Zhang, K 2026, ' Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia ', Journal of Hazardous Materials , vol. 517, 143477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 
 
 
 
 Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia. / Liu, Ke; Gong, Yuxi; Zhi, Suli et al. In: Journal of Hazardous Materials , Vol. 517, 143477, 01.10.2026. Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 TY - JOUR T1 - Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia AU - Liu, Ke AU - Gong, Yuxi AU - Zhi, Suli AU - Min, Siyuan AU - Xu, Xiaoyu AU - Wang, Han AU - Liu, Jiahua AU - Cao, Yuang AU - Trebuch, Lukas Matthias AU - Shen, Shizhou AU - Zhang, Keqiang PY - 2026/10/1 Y1 - 2026/10/1 N2 - This study investigated synergistic pollutant removal and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) reduction by consortia of Bacillus licheniformis with Chlorella or Synechocystis. Using the initial algal-to-bacterial cell ratio as the primary variable, we evaluated growth, microbial community, pollutant removal, and ARG distribution across the water phase, algal cells, and extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) layers. B. licheniformis enhanced total algal biomass and absolute photosynthetic pigment production, while the ratio significantly influenced specific pigment, protein, and polysaccharide contents per unit biomass, indicating distinct resource allocation strategies. Both consortia efficiently removed nutrients, performing best at a low ratio of 1:3, which also differentially shaped microbial communities and their functions within soluble (S-EPS), loosely bound (LB-EPS), and tightly bound (TB-EPS) EPS. ARGs showed pronounced spatial partitioning: in the aqueous phase, monofunctional resistance genes were substantially reduced, whereas multidrug resistance and regulatory genes were enriched. Across compartments, Chlorella accumulated ARGs in the middle EPS layer (LB-EPS > S-EPS > TB-EPS), whereas Synechocystis enriched the inner layer (TB-EPS > LB-EPS > S-EPS) with higher intracellular abundance, with Chlorella showing greater stability in ARG regulation. These findings identify spatial partitioning as a key determinant of ARG fate in algal–bacterial consortia, guiding safer wastewater treatment design. AB - This study investigated synergistic pollutant removal and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) reduction by consortia of Bacillus licheniformis with Chlorella or Synechocystis. Using the initial algal-to-bacterial cell ratio as the primary variable, we evaluated growth, microbial community, pollutant removal, and ARG distribution across the water phase, algal cells, and extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) layers. B. licheniformis enhanced total algal biomass and absolute photosynthetic pigment production, while the ratio significantly influenced specific pigment, protein, and polysaccharide contents per unit biomass, indicating distinct resource allocation strategies. Both consortia efficiently removed nutrients, performing best at a low ratio of 1:3, which also differentially shaped microbial communities and their functions within soluble (S-EPS), loosely bound (LB-EPS), and tightly bound (TB-EPS) EPS. ARGs showed pronounced spatial partitioning: in the aqueous phase, monofunctional resistance genes were substantially reduced, whereas multidrug resistance and regulatory genes were enriched. Across compartments, Chlorella accumulated ARGs in the middle EPS layer (LB-EPS > S-EPS > TB-EPS), whereas Synechocystis enriched the inner layer (TB-EPS > LB-EPS > S-EPS) with higher intracellular abundance, with Chlorella showing greater stability in ARG regulation. These findings identify spatial partitioning as a key determinant of ARG fate in algal–bacterial consortia, guiding safer wastewater treatment design. KW - Algae–bacteria ratio KW - Antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) KW - extracellular polymeric substance KW - Livestock wastewater treatment KW - Microalgae U2 - 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 DO - 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 M3 - Article C2 - 42691904 AN - SCOPUS:105049042497 SN - 0304-3894 VL - 517 JO - Journal of Hazardous Materials JF - Journal of Hazardous Materials M1 - 143477 ER - 
 
 
 
 Liu K, Gong Y, Zhi S, Min S, Xu X, Wang H et al. Distinct cyanobacteria/ eukaryotic algae types and varying initial algae-to-bacteria ratios drive the spatial partitioning and reduction of antibiotic resistance genes in algal-bacterial consortia . Journal of Hazardous Materials . 2026 Oct 1;517:143477. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2026.143477 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Powered by Pure Link opens in a new tab , Scopus Link opens in a new tab & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine&trade; Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 All content on this site: Copyright &copy; 2026 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply
 
 We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research data protection policy Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 About web accessibility Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report vulnerability Link opens in a new tab