Several examples of ecotoxicological episodes are aptly available in literature. Each of these disasters have resulted in the widespread damage to natural resources, wild life, humans and ecosystems. Minamata episode-1956; Bhopal gas tragedy- 1984; London Smog-1952; DDT ecosystem impact- 1960s; Chernobyl disaster- 1986; Exxon Valdez accident-1989 and Fukushima disaster- 2011 are few incidences. In addition, global warming, increased carbon dioxide and methane emissions, wild fires and melting of polar ice are a big threat to all major biomes. Climate change and its consequences on structure and function of ecosystem(s) now warrant a strategic management and planning. Climate change can be defined as “significant shifts in global or regional weather patterns caused by anthropogenic activities like burning of fossil fuels culminating into rising temperatures, melting of ice, sea level rise and increase in the frequency and severity of extreme weather conditions”. Greenhouse gases viz. CO2 and CH4 trap solar heat forming a blanket around the Earth. According to NASA and IPCC, currently Earth is heating at an unprecedented rate. The year 2024 was declared as the warmest year by WMO. Experts argue that climate change is altering the ecotoxicological landscape serving as “threat multiplier”. It makes ecosystem(s) more vulnerable to toxic hazards. In terrestrial ecosystems, climate change may manifest into altered species distribution, phenology, disturbed food webs, loss of biodiversity, damage to ecosystem functions and increased risk to communicable and non-communicable diseases as well. In this section we discuss how rising temperatures, shifting precipitation trends and ocean acidification alter the behavior, transport, bioavailability and toxicity of environmental poisons, i.e. toxic elements, pesticides, persistent organic pollutants, biotoxins and emerging pollutants leading to enhanced, often synergistic risks to planetary health. Significant changes in soil health have been attributed to climate change. Parameters like soil erosion, loss of soil organic matter, permafrost thaw, acidification, salinization of soil, nutrient cycle disruption, carbon loss, changes in microbial communities and plant soil relationships have exhibited noteworthy effects (Nigussie, 2024). Most important the effects of climate change can be demonstrated on carbon cycle. Global CO2 emissions have recorded high, with total emissions of 38.11 billion metric tons (IEA Global Energy Review,2026). Due to continued rise in fossil fuel emissions, driven by coal and oil demand, achieving the target of 1.5OC decrease in global temperature by 2050, seems increasingly difficult to meet (Crippa, 2025). Climate change can disrupt oxygen cycle primarily by inducing ocean acidification, deoxygenation and reducing atmospheric oxygen levels. A 2% decrease in ocean oxygen levels over the past 50 years, has been registered. This is about 10 times faster than the increase in CO2. The comb