Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41939-026-01263-1
ORIGINAL PAPER
Effects of cyclic hydrostatic pressure on the water absorption
of polymer matrix solid buoyancy material
Wenjie Zhou 1 · Lei Chen 2 · Guoting Liu 2 · Fushun Liang 2 · Xiaoying Yan 2 · Peng Dong 1,2
Received: 7 February 2025 / Revised: 16 August 2026 / Accepted: 17 August 2026
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
From the perspective of service, the effects of cyclic hydrostatic pressure on the water absorption of polymer-matrix solid
buoyancy material (PSBM) are critical for the submarine safety. However, the underlying mechanism has not been fully
clariﬁed to date. This work is focused on the performance aging and underlying mechanisms of PSBM under cyclic hydrostatic
pressure. To comprehensively exhibit the actual service, a drying process was incorporated after each cycle during the
hydrostatic pressure tests. The results show that the water absorption of PSBM increases with the number of uses, and
long-term stress relaxation induces continuous internal stress redistribution, which exacerbates local stress concentration and
ultimately triggers the initiation of microcracks. Stress relaxation is attributed to such performance degradation. Moreover, a
model correlating the number of cycles to water absorption behavior was established, which enables the prediction of PSBM
water absorption behavior during cyclic service. These ﬁndings are beneﬁcial for improving the safety of submersibles and
provide signiﬁcant insights for the design of buoyancy materials in engineering applications.
Keywords Solid buoyancy material · Water absorption · Cyclic hydrostatic pressure · Lifespan prediction · Cyclic aging
1 Introduction
Polymer-matrix solid buoyancy material (PSBM) is a solid
compound formed through physical and chemical reactions
by ﬁlling inorganic materials such as glass microspheres into
the resin matrix (Xu and Zhang2016), which is necessary for
the submarine by providing the buoyancy to achieve deep div-
ing and surfacing. It has become the ﬁrst choice buoyancy
material in the deep-sea (Chenggui et al. 2017) ﬁeld, because
of its relatively low density, high strength, low water absorp-
tion, and low cost.
Water absorption (Li et al. 2009; Chen 2018) is one of the
most critical properties for the PSBM. It not only affects
the density and compressive strength but also determines
the buoyancy it provides. Currently, the water absorption for
almost all underwater equipment is required to be below 3%
in initial tests, even some standards targeting rates less than
B Peng Dong
dongpeng@tyut.edu.cn
1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Taiyuan
University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China
2 Shanxi Fenxi Heavy Industry Co. Ltd., Taiyuan 030027,
China
1%. At present, most of the research on the water absorp-
tion behavior of materials is to improve the composition and
processing of materials. Jiyouping et al. ( 2023) proposed a
vacuum-assisted isostatic pressing process. By fully accu-
mulating the internal glass beads, the internal pore defects
are reduced, thereby reducing the water absorption of the
material. Long et al. (2016) used a variety of silane coupling
agents to modify the surface of hollow glass microspheres,
thereby reducing the gap between the matrix and the glass
microspheres and the water absorption of the material. Liu
et al. (2023a) used the vacuum composite casting process to
increase the curing degree of the matrix by means of step-
wise heating curing, thereby reducing the water absorption
performance of the material. Unfortunately, people pay lim-
ited attention to the change of water absorption of PSBM after
multiple cycles, whether in practice or scientiﬁc research.
It is important to clarify whether the water absorption of
PSBM will increase after the repeated use of underwater
equipment, and it is also important to know the number of
cycles at which it will exceed the critical threshold. In fact,
previous studies have shown that visible cracks (Cui et al.
2018) were found on the solid buoyancy material block of a
deep-sea manned submersible after multiple uses. Kochetkov
and Maksimov ( 1996) found that the water absorption of
0123456789().: V,-vol 123
 183 Page 2 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
solid buoyancy materials continuously increases with time
when placed in the marine environment, leading to a gradual
decrease in compressive strength. Zhang and Zhang ( 2023)
found that the tensile strength, elongation at break, compres-
sive strength, tensile modulus and compressive modulus of
solid buoyancy materials decreased signiﬁcantly under cyclic
hydrostatic pressure. In this case, it is reasonably deduced
that the performance of the PSBM deteriorates with repeated
use, resulting in a severe threat to the safety of the sub-
mersible and its occupants (Grosjean et al. 2009; Helal et al.
2019). It should be noted that current research and tests on
the water absorption performance of solid buoyancy materi-
als keep specimens immersed in water all the time, without
considering that they may be removed from the water after a
certain service and continue to serve after a period of time.
The water absorption behavior of the material during this pro-
cess could potentially differ from that when it is consistently
submerged in water.
Therefore, cyclic hydrostatic pressure tests were carried
out on PSBM specimens, with a drying procedure imple-
mented after each loading cycle to simulate the practical
condition where the material is retrieved from the water
surface after service. The failure mechanism and water
absorption behavior of PSBM during cyclic loading were
investigated from the perspectives of microstructure evo-
lution and mechanical property variation. On the basis of
experimental data, a model was established to describe the
correlation between cycle number and water absorption per-
formance of PSBM, aiming to identify the critical transition
point in property evolution. This critical point facilitates the
prediction of the service life of PSBM under cyclic loading,
thereby improving its reliability and stability.
2 Experimental details
2.1 Experimental materials and preparation
The main part of PSBM used is composed of hollow glass
microspheres (HGM) and epoxy resin, with the remaining
components being curing agent, toughening agent and ﬁber.
A batch of the same PSBM samples was prepared for exper-
imental analysis. The ﬁller content is the ratio of the mass
of the insulating glass microspheres to the mass of the entire
composite material. Raw materials were obtained from the
following suppliers: epoxy resin is bisphenol F epoxy resin
(industrial grade), supplied by Nantong Xingchen Synthetic
Materials Co., Ltd.; curing agent is methyl tetrahydroph-
thalic anhydride (Me THPA, industrial grade), supplied by
Puyang Huicheng Electronic Materials Co., Ltd.; toughen-
ing agent is DMP-30; glass beads are hollow glass beads B;
and ﬁber was supplied by Bengbu Glass Industry Design and
Research Institute. The compressive strength of the tested
sample is 2.36 MPa, the density is 0.35 g/cm 3, the diameter
is 14.00 mm, and the height is 25.00 mm. The preparation
process is shown in Fig. 1. The parameters of hollow glass
microspheres (HGM) are shown in Table 1. The parameters
of epoxy resin are shown in Table 2.
2.2 Cyclic loading test
First, utilize the lathe to remove the outer surface of the
PSBM. Then weigh the material, and the initial mass was
recorded as m0. After the inﬁltration treatment, and the mate-
rial was placed in deionized water for immersion treatment,
the treatment time was 30 s, and then the surface of the sam-
ple was immediately wiped dry with a towel, and the mass
data were recorded as m 1.
The loading equipment is a hydrostatic pressure simula-
tion test device, as shown in Fig. 2a. Isostatic pressure is
used for loading. In accordance with Miner’s linear fatigue
damage accumulation rule and continuum damage mechan-
ics, the ultimate compressive loading test adopted herein
is regarded as an accelerated aging approach, which can
accelerate damage evolution and reveal the underlying aging
failure mechanism under limited cycles. The PSBM speci-
men was loaded into the permeable ﬁxture and placed into the
external water pressure experimental autoclave. The applied
pressure was set to 2.36 MPa, and the holding time was 10
h. Figure 2b shows the cyclic loading curve for three cycles.
According to this procedure, 30 cyclic loading tests were
performed. Upon completion of pressurization, excess mois-
ture on the surface of the PSBM specimen was immediately
wiped off with a towel, followed by weighing, and the mea-
sured mass was recorded as m 2. Next, the water absorption
of the specimen was calculated using Eq. ( 1). Subsequently,
the specimen was placed in an incubator and held at 60 °C
for 5h to ensure complete evaporation of penetrated water
molecules. The above procedures were repeated to complete
each full cycle. A pure thermal cycling control test without
hydrostatic pressure was supplemented, in which specimens
only underwent cyclic drying at 60 °C over 5 h. As shown
in Fig. 2c, analysis of the control group data shows that the
compressive strength remains nearly unchanged under pure
thermal cycling. This result demonstrates that thermal aging
can be distinguished from resin post-curing effects. It further
veriﬁes that cyclic hydrostatic loading and the accompany-
ing structural damage dominate the mechanical degradation
of the material.
m /equal1m2 − m1
m0
× 100% (1)
123
Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 Page 3 of 12 183 
Fig. 1 Fabrication ﬂow chart of the polymer matrix solid buoyancy material composites
Table 1 Calculation table of
various parameters of the hollow
glass microspheres (HGM)
HGM type Extrusion strength
(MPa)
Typical density
(g/cm3)
Appearance Particle size
distribution (μm)
B 13 0.25 White powder <90
Table 2 Calculation table of various parameters of the epoxy
Resin type Compressive strength
(MPa)
Tensile strength
(MPa)
Viscosity (Pa s) Density (g/cm 3) Appearance
Bisphenol F epoxy resin 11.3 13.7 3.8 1.12 White liquid
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Cyclic water absorption behavior
Figure 3 illustrates that the water absorption of PSBM gener-
ally increases with the number of cycles. Experimental data
indicate that the water absorption evolution can be divided
into three distinct stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the water absorp-
tion presents a nonlinear variation. At the early cyclic stage,
the water absorption of PSBM ﬂuctuates obviously with
increasing hydrostatic pressure cycles. As the cycle num-
ber further increases, the water absorption enters the second
stage, in which the variation gradually decreases and tends to
converge. After a period of stable water absorption, the value
rises sharply, corresponding to the third evolutionary stage.
Unlike the second stage, the third stage is characterized by a
rapid increase in water absorption. Signiﬁcant differences in
surface morphology can be observed among the three stages,
as displayed in Fig. 3. In the ﬁrst stage (Fig. 3a), no obvious
pores or defects appear on the material surface. In the second
stage (Fig. 3b, c), tiny cracks and pores gradually generate
on the surface. In the third stage (Fig. 3d), prominent sur-
face cracks emerge. The compressive strength evolution of
the composite under cyclic loading is summarized in Fig. 3f.
The curves demonstrate that the compressive strength gen-
erally decreases with the increase in water absorption and
presents an aggravated degradation trend as the number of
cycles increases.
There are two main reasons for the difference in water
absorption behavior of materials (Gomez et al. 2021). One
is the water absorption of the material itself, and the other
is the pores in the composite material. The main matrix of
the solid buoyancy material is a mixture of cured epoxy resin
and glass beads. As a polymer organic material, although it
has a certain water absorption, the incorporation of beads will
produce some small pores and the cavity after the break of the
beads. Therefore, the main contributor to water absorption
of the solid buoyancy material is the pores (Hardiman et al.
2016).
123
 183 Page 4 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
Fig. 2 a External water pressure experimental kettle. b Cyclic loading curve(three cycles). c Compressive strength versus cycle number for pure
thermal cycling control tests without hydrostatic pressure
Based on these observations, it can be hypothesized that
the underlying reasons for the observed changes are as
follows. In the early loading stage, cyclic loads induce instan-
taneous elastic deformation of the material; the temporary
opening and closure of pores and microcavities interfere
with the transport and diffusion of water molecules, which
consequently causes a ﬂuctuation in water absorption rate.
In the second stage, the water absorption capacity of the
material gradually stabilizes because the channels for water
molecules to enter the PSBM remain unobstructed. As the
experiment progresses, the internal water absorption capac-
ity of the material reaches saturation, resulting in a state of
equilibrium. In the third stage, the continued increase in water
absorption capacity is caused by the expansion of the internal
channels, which occurs as the experiment advances, leading
to structural damage within the material and the formation
of microcracks on the surface.
3.2 Stress relaxation test
Polymer materials have macromolecular chain structure and
unique thermal motion, which determine that they have dif-
ferent physical properties from low molecular materials.
The most important feature of the mechanical behavior of
polymer materials is that they possess high elasticity and vis-
coelasticity. Under the action of external force and energy, the
mechanical behavior of polymer materials is more strongly
affected by factors such as temperature and time than that
of metal materials, and their mechanical properties change
greatly. The deformation of the polymer is achieved by
adjusting the internal molecular conformation (Keddie et al.
123
Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 Page 5 of 12 183 
Fig. 3 a The surface of the ﬁrst stage of the experimental cycle. b The
surface of the second stage of the experimental cycle. c Different sur-
faces in the second stage of the experimental cycle. d The surface of the
third stage of the experimental cycle. e Water absorption of specimens
under different cycle numbers. Each data point represents the average
value of three parallel tests (n /equal13). f Changes in compressive strength
of specimens with varying cycle numbers. Compressive strength vs.
cycle number. n /equal13 per data point
1994). Stress is always involved during the forming process.
In the process of curing into a product, residual internal stress
is inevitably trapped inside the composites during curing.
Such residual stress will slowly relax during the storage and
use of the product, resulting in warpage, deformation and
even stress cracking of the product. Stress that is not fully
relieved during curing will be more or less frozen within
the product. Since PSBM is fabricated under certain pres-
sure conditions, regions with relatively high internal stress
are inevitably formed (Liu et al. 2023b). We further inves-
tigated the cracking mechanism. The analysis demonstrates
that cyclic loading accumulates fatigue damage continuously,
coupled with stress relaxation under long-term service envi-
ronments. Their synergistic effect facilitates the initiation
and propagation of internal damage in PSBM. Correspond-
ing experiments were conducted to conﬁrm the presence of
stress relaxation inside the material.
The PSBM is made into a stress relaxation sample accord-
ing to the test requirements, and the stress relaxation test of
the sample is carried out before and after the hydrostatic pres-
sure cyclic load test in compliance with GB/T 9871–2008.
The stress relaxation curve of the material within 360 s after
stretching was determined. The stress relaxation condition
is 0.8 times the elongation at break. In the initial stage, the
stress decay rate is relatively fast, and the stress decay rate
gradually decreases with time, and ﬁnally tends to the equilib-
rium value. This indicates that the viscoelastic performance
of the material is essentially determined by the viscoelastic
performance of the epoxy resin.
123
 183 Page 6 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
Fig. 4 Stress relaxation curves
before and after cyclic testing of
polymer matrix solid buoyancy
material
The stress relaxation curves of the PSBM before and after
the cyclic loading test are similar. The curves show that the
PSBM has a large amount of stress relaxation. As shown in
Fig. 4, the relaxation amount of the sample after the cyclic
loading test is close to 46.8%, and the relaxation amount of
the sample before the cyclic loading test is 43.9%. Contrary
to the above numerical comparison, after the external pres-
sure cycle aging experiment, the relaxation of the PSBM is
reduced, which indicates that the long-term external pressure
cycle service will lead to an increase in the stress relaxation
of the PSBM, which not only weakens its viscoelasticity,
but also reduces compressive strength and water absorp-
tion. In the process of recycling, the molecular chain of the
PSBM will be elongated, and the internal stress will gradu-
ally decrease with time.
The compressive strengths of pristine PSBM specimens
and samples subjected to 20 cyclic loading cycles were tested.
The results show that the compressive strength of the material
exhibits obvious degradation after 20 cycles, which is con-
sistent with the trend presented in Fig.3f: signiﬁcant changes
in mechanical properties occur around 20 cycles. Given that
abrupt variations in compressive strength and water absorp-
tion are observed at 20 cycles, this characteristic node was
selected to conduct stress relaxation tests. The test results ver-
ify that stress relaxation originates from the slow motion of
polymer molecular chains. Comprehensive analysis demon-
strates that cumulative fatigue damage continuously develops
with increasing cycles. Combined with stress redistribution
induced by stress relaxation, the synergistic effect of these
two factors continuously accelerates the performance degra-
dation of the material.
3.3 Micromorphologies of buoyant materials
The fracture morphology of PSBM was characterized by
optical microscopy, as shown in Fig. 5. Scanning elec-
tron microscopy (SEM) was further adopted to observe
microstructural changes of specimens before and after cyclic
loading. The SEM results revealed that the hollow glass beads
inside the material exhibit no evident damage throughout
the cyclic test. It is concluded that the variation in mate-
rial performance during cyclic loading mainly stems from
matrix property deterioration, which induces material aging
and mechanical degradation. The results show that the overall
mechanical behavior of buoyant materials is strongly affected
by the properties of the matrix (d’Almeida and Monteiro
1998).
In Fig. 6a, small cracks and pores inevitably exist on
the surface and interior of the original PSBM specimen.
Therefore, under cyclic external hydrostatic pressure, water
molecules penetrate into the interior of the material through
surface microcracks and pores. As the number of cycles
increases, water molecules gradually diffuse into the inter-
nal high-stress regions. Under the coupling effect of water
inﬁltration and cyclic loading, stress relaxation ﬁrst occurs
in the high-stress regions of PSBM, eventually resulting in
the initiation and propagation of internal cracks.
123
Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 Page 7 of 12 183 
Fig. 5 a The fracture surface. b The fracture surface under the light microscope
A comparison of the micrographs before loading and after
the 10th hydrostatic pressure cycle in Fig. 6a and b indicates
no obvious variation of the overall internal pore structure
of the specimens. As shown in Fig. 7a, when the number
of cycles reaches 15, the interfacial voids between hollow
glass microspheres and the resin matrix expand signiﬁcantly.
This provides additional penetration pathways for water
molecules, macroscopically leading to a gradual increase in
water absorption. After 30 cyclic loadings (Fig. 7b), SEM
observations show evident interfacial debonding and delam-
ination at the microsphere-matrix interface, which destroys
the integrity of interfacial bonding.
Further analysis of material property variations indicates
that such evolutions are not induced by changes in the inter-
nal composition of the material. Meanwhile, EDS analysis
was conducted to characterize the microstructural evolution
within the PSBM matrix. As shown in Fig. 6e, the primary
constituents of PSBM after cyclic tests remain cured epoxy
resin and hollow glass microspheres, and no new phases are
generated. The dominant factor driving property evolution
during cyclic loading is molecular chain relaxation, which
results in the performance degradation of PSBM. There-
fore, the chemical composition of PSBM remains unchanged
under cyclic external hydrostatic pressure. The water absorp-
tion behavior corresponds to the simple inward diffusion
of water molecules. Water penetration does not trigger irre-
versible physical or chemical reactions inside the PSBM.
In summary, under cyclic external hydrostatic pressure
loading, the dominant factor limiting the service life of
PSBM is internal stress relaxation. Stress relaxation pref-
erentially takes place in high-stress regions, triggering the
initiation of microcracks. As the service duration extends,
these microcracks propagate from the interior outward and
eventually develop into severe macroscopic cracking. The
crack propagation process involves matrix cracking, interfa-
cial debonding between the matrix and hollow glass beads,
water molecule diffusion along internal channels, fracture
of glass beads, and internal and edge delamination of the
composite. These damage modes interact synergistically and
continuously evolve in the form of a damage ﬁeld, constitut-
ing a progressive damage accumulation process. Therefore,
it is concluded that the failure of PSBM under cyclic load-
ing originates from the synergistic effect of internal stress
relaxation and cumulative cyclic fatigue damage.
3.4 Model and verification
Poor dimensional stability is an inherent disadvantage of
polymer materials. Stress relaxation often occurs under
normal-temperature conditions, which leads to the fail-
ure of material structure. This factor must be considered
in engineering design. Stress relaxation refers to the phe-
nomenon that the internal stress of the material or component
decreases with time. The phenomenon of stress relaxation is
widespread, especially as a key part of the structural system.
The phenomenon of stress relaxation has a serious impact on
its working performance and bearing capacity. It will not only
reduce the safety and service life of the material structure,
but also limit its application in the industrial ﬁeld. Therefore,
this factor must be taken into account. The stress relaxation
phenomenon will lead to the change of material structure
performance. Because the internal viscous strain (viscoplas-
tic strain) component increases with time, the rebound strain
component gradually decreases with time, resulting in the
phenomenon that the deformation restoring force (rebound
stress) gradually decreases with time, and this process affects
the reliability of its long-term service. On the premise of not
affecting the basic characteristics of materials, it is of great
signiﬁcance to study the stress relaxation characteristics of
solid buoyancy materials and establish the stress relaxation
model for understanding their physical laws (Romanyk et al.
2014; Papanicolaou et al.2008; Koyanagi et al.2004; Guedes
2006).
The essence of solid buoyancy materials is polymers,
and the process of polymer reaching equilibrium through
physical aging is essentially the relaxation process of glassy
123
 183 Page 8 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
Fig. 6 1 SEM images of PSBM. a SEM before cyclic loading (Mag /equal1
×200, scale bar /equal150 μm). b 10 SEM after cyclic loading (Mag /equal1
×300, scale bar /equal130 μm). c Samples after compressive strength test
before cyclic loading. d SEM after compressive strength test before
cyclic loading (Mag /equal1×300, scale bar /equal130 μm). e EDS after cyclic
loading (Mag /equal1×500, scale bar /equal120 μm)
molecular structure (Guedes 2008; Mano et al. 2005). Since
the relaxation rate of the ’ frozen ’ molecular chain is slow, the
physical aging behavior has a long-term range of characteris-
tics. It has been proved that the movement of molecular chain
segments plays a decisive role in the structural relaxation of
polymers. The chain segments in the high-energy conforma-
tion region of the polymer are transformed into a low-energy
state through local conformational changes, which can be
regarded as the essence of structural relaxation during aging
(Cowie and Arrighi 2014; Wang 2006). Under the action of
large stress, the barrier of chain segment motion of glassy
polymer is relatively reduced, thus shortening the relaxation
time of polymer chain segment motion along the direction
of external force, so that the frozen chain segment of glassy
polymer can cross the barrier and move to a near-high elastic
state. Experiments show that there is a relationship between
relaxation time and stress (Y ang1999; Moynihan et al. 1976;
Di Lisio et al. 2024).
τ /equal1τ0 exp
( E − ασ
RT
)
(2)
123
Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 Page 9 of 12 183 
Fig. 7 SEM images of PSBM. a15 SEM after cyclic loading (Mag /equal1×200, scale bar /equal150 μm). b 30 SEM after cyclic loading (Mag /equal1×200,
scale bar /equal150 μm)
where τ0 denotes the reference relaxation time; E is the acti-
vation energy of matrix resin (unit: J/mol, standard molar
energy unit); σ denotes the cyclic equivalent hydrostatic
pressure (Pa); α is the stress weakening coefﬁcient, which
depends on the material microstructure and is calibrated via
stress relaxation tests; R denotes the universal gas constant
J/(mol K); T denotes the thermodynamic temperature (K).
This formula infers that when the external stress of the
material changes, the stress relaxation time of the material
will also change. Therefore, as the external water–pressure
cyclic experiment proceeds, water penetrates into the mate-
rial, and the bearable pressure of the material gradually
decreases, which continuously shortens the relaxation time,
inducing stress relaxation of the material and generating
internal cracks, such that the material performance fails to
meet service requirements.
In the process of normal use and aging of solid buoy-
ancy materials, it is considered that the pressure borne by the
materials is within the scope of use, so the internal glass
beads are not broken. Two competing processes, namely
strength enhancement and damage degradation, occur during
service (Moynihan et al. 1976). For thermosetting compos-
ites exposed to the environment under no load, assuming
that the enhancement process and damage are independent
of each other, the relationship between the median aging life
(Bogdanov et al. 2023) and the residual strength of the com-
posites can be determined by the following formula. Static
corrosion-free aging model:
S /equal1S0 + η(1 − e−λt ) − β ln(1 + θ t)( 3 )
where η is the material parameter, reﬂecting the degree
of curing of the material. Matrix post-curing strengthen-
ing coefﬁcient (corresponding to the short-term strength
improvement induced by continuous resin curing); λ is the
material and external environmental parameters, reﬂecting
the strengthening rate characteristics; β reﬂects the corro-
sion parameter of external environment, which is governed
by the combined effect of chemical corrosion parameter θC
and water-induced physical damage coefﬁcient θ W; S is the
strength of the material after aging t time; S 0 is the initial
strength of the material. The parameters η and β are only
related to the material properties and can be determined by
a series of accelerated aging tests. They can also be used to
determine the λ and θ in the equation and extrapolate to the
natural environment. ln(1+ θ t) this term denotes the cumu-
lative damage rate per unit time, which is governed by the
stress relaxation rate of the material.
By establishing the equation of the number of cycles and
the relaxation time, we combine (2) and (3) to further express
the service life of the PSBM. The total duration of a single
loading cycle t is ﬁxed, consisting of pressure ramping, a
10-h pressure holding stage, immersion treatment, and a 5-h
drying stage. The total service time has a deﬁnite correlation
with the number of loading cycles.
t /equal1N tc (3-1)
Consistent with experimental observations: as the cycle
number N increases, cumulative internal damage leads to
an elevation in the effective bearing stress of the material.
Meanwhile, the residual strength of the material is dominated
by the degree of viscoelastic relaxation. Substitute Eq. ( 3–1)
into Eq. (3) to accomplish variable transformation from time
t to cycle number N. We obtain the relationship between the
relaxation time and the number of cycles as follows:
τ /equal1τ0exp
[ E
RT − α
RT S0 − α
RT η(1 − e−λt)+ α
RT βln(1 + θ t)
]
(4)
123
 183 Page 10 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
To simplify the calculation order: E, R, T, α,S 0 are inher-
ent material-environment parameters and remain constant
under identical experimental conditions. All constant terms
are combined item by item to simplify the calculation proce-
dure.
k /equal1E
RT − α
RT S0 (5)
a1 /equal1α
RT η (6)
a2 /equal1α
RT β (7)
Because the E, R, T,α,S 0 in the material are constants, they
will be replaced by constants k, a1, a2. Simpliﬁed formula:
τ /equal1τ0exp
[
k − a1(1 − e−λt)+a 2ln(1 + θ t)
]
(8)
In the process of this experiment, we can get the rela-
tionship between stress and cycle times. Using this, the
relationship between the number of service can be obtained.
θ W refers to the water-induced physical damage coefﬁcient.
No chemical corrosion of resin is observed in the present
material. Nevertheless, the penetration of water molecules
into pores and matrix plasticization under wet–dry cycles
are non-negligible, and thus θ W cannot be set to zero.
Experimental results indicate that interconnected microc-
racks initiate within the matrix once the relaxation time
reaches the critical value. This critical condition is adopted
for model simpliﬁcation.
t /equal1−λln
(
1+ S
η − E
αη
)
(9)
Based on Fick’s water diffusion theory and polymer plas-
ticization theory, water absorption of the matrix is divided
into two components: bulk water absorption and pore water
absorption: The water absorption of the material is the water
absorption of the matrix and the water absorption of the pores,
and the relationship between the water absorption rate and
the strength of the material matrix:
Dσ /equal1D0exp
( α
E kwm
)
(10)
where: D0 is the initial diffusion coefﬁcient; D σ is the dif-
fusion coefﬁcient under stress; α is a constant, the value
range is 6–10, E is the compressive strength of the matrix
material, and wm is the water absorption of the matrix.
With the increase of the number of times, the force itself
remains unchanged, but the force it can withstand gradually
decreases, resulting in the appearance of porosity, so that the
water absorption rate of the material continues to increase.
Due to the plasticizing effect of the matrix, water penetration
leads to a decrease in the glass transition temperature of the
polymer matrix:
E /equal1E0exp(−kwtotal) (11)
If we combine ( 9) with ( 11), we get:
t /equal1−λln
(
1+ S
η − E0exp(−kwtotal)
αη
)
(12)
Since the water absorption of the PSBM in the early stage
was ﬂuctuating and could not be ﬁtted, we ﬁtted the 8th to
20th groups of the PSBM as shown in Fig. 4. Figure 4 shows
that the intermediate materials of 1% and 1.25% are in the
range of normal use, but the water absorption of the PSBM
increases faster after the 20th group.
According to the simpliﬁed formula ( 12), the cycle life of
the PSBM can be improved by increasing the curing degree
of the PSBM and adjusting the structure. The number of
cycles of the PSBM can also be inferred by this formula. This
formula is ﬁtted with the experimental results. As shown in
Fig. 8, it is found that the ﬁtting is consistent. When the max-
imum water absorption of the material reaches a horizontal
state, the performance of the PSBM will reach a peak.
4 Conclusions
In this work, the cyclic aging process of PSBM was stud-
ied experimentally. The relationship between the number
of cycles and the water absorption rate of the same PSBM
under cyclic conditions was obtained. Then, the variation
in PSBM service life was analyzed based on the change of
water absorption in the external water pressure cycle test.
The life prediction model was established using the relation-
ship between the number of cycles and the water absorption,
and the reasons for the change of the life of the material
were analyzed by the change of the internal stress of the
PSBM. Finally, from the microscopic level of scanning elec-
tron microscopy, energy spectrum analysis and mechanical
properties analysis, it is concluded that the failure mechanism
of PSBM is internal stress relaxation. The main conclusions
were as follows:
1. The water absorption behavior of PSBM presents two dis-
tinct evolution modes. The water absorption in the early
stage conforms to classical Fickian diffusion. As cyclic
loading induces microcracks and structural damage,
the water absorption process gradually transforms into
damage-coupled non-Fickian diffusion. On this basis,
the authors proposed an empirical formula to predict the
water absorption of cycle times and water absorption.
According to the curve of the simulation formula, it can
123
Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 Page 11 of 12 183 
Fig. 8 The experimental data
were ﬁtted using Formula 12.
Each data point represents the
mean of three independent
measurements (n /equal13)
be determined that during the cycle of the PSBM, when
the water absorption performance of the PSBM reaches
equilibrium for a period of time, the performance of the
PSBM will decrease seriously.
2. After the cycle process, the water-absorption variation
of PSBM is as follows: in the early stage of the mate-
rial cycle, there is a ﬂuctuation. At the initial loading
stage, cyclic loads induce transient elastic deformation
of the material. The repeated temporary opening and
closing of pores and micro-gaps disrupt the diffusion
of water molecules, resulting in unstable water absorp-
tion. After numerous cycles, the interfacial voids between
microspheres and matrix expand considerably, and elas-
tic deformation no longer hinders water penetration, so
the material gradually reaches water saturation. With the
increase in the number of cycles, further enlargement
of interfacial gaps causes massive detachment of micro-
spheres, which continuously raises the water uptake
capacity and ultimately degrades the comprehensive per-
formance of PSBM.
3. Through SEM, spectral analysis and stress relaxation
experiments, it is found that at the micro level, in the
process of cyclic aging of materials, the main cause of
PSBM failure is stress relaxation. Microcrack initiation
is not solely caused by stress relaxation. The combined
effect of cumulative fatigue damage under cyclic load-
ing and stress redistribution induced by long-term stress
relaxation leads to local stress concentration and ﬁnally
triggers microcrack nucleation.
Due to the application of experimental equipment and
methods, this study has some limitations and shortcomings.
This paper does not consider the change of water absorption
rate for a long time and the inﬂuence of seawater salinity
on water absorption. In the future, this paper will continue to
study the aging characteristics of solid buoyancy materials in
the marine environment. Considering various environmental
factors, the coupling effect of seawater salinity and long time
on water absorption will be studied.
Author contributions Wenjie Zhou Writing—review & editing, Inves-
tigation, Formal analysis. Peng Dong Writing—review & editing,
Supervision, Methodology Visualization, Formal analysis. Fushun
Liang, Xiaoying Y an Writing—review & editing, V alidation. Lei Chen,
Guoting Liu, Writing—review & editing, Supervision. Peng Dong
Writing—review & editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization,
Resources.
Funding Funding was provided by Basic Application Research Project
of Shanxi Province (Grant no. 20210302123116).
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the
current study.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest The authors declare that they have no known com-
peting ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
123
 183 Page 12 of 12 Multiscale and Multidisciplinary Modeling, Experiments and Design (2026) 9:183 
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material.
Y ou do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the
copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativeco
mmons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
Bogdanov AA, Panin SV , Kosmachev PV (2023) Fatigue damage
assessment and lifetime prediction of short ﬁber reinforced poly-
mer composites—a review. J Compos Sci 7(12):484
Chen C (2018) Research on water absorbability of solid buoyant mate-
rials
Chenggui H, Peizhi Z, Fangquan G, Qihai A, Fen W, Weiyue H (2017)
Development review of full depth of buoyancy material. Mater
Mech Eng 41(09):14–18
Cowie J, Arrighi V (2014) Physical aging of polymer blends. pp
1357–1394
Cui W, Guo J, Pan B (2018) A preliminary study on the buoyancy
materials for the use in full ocean depth manned submersibles. J
Ship Mech 22(06):736–757
d’Almeida JRM, Monteiro SN (1998) The resin/hardener ratio as a
processing parameter for modifying the mechanical behaviour of
epoxy-matrix/glass microsphere composites. Compos Sci Technol
58(10):1593–1598
Di Lisio V , Rocchi LA, Cangialosi D (2024) Twofold facet of kinetics
of glass aging. Phys Rev Lett 133(4):048201
Gomez AJA, Caire M, Torres LCAR, V az MA (2021) Bend stiffener
linear viscoelastic thermo-mechanical analysis, part II: Numerical
solution and case study. J Mar Struct 77:102947
Grosjean F, Bouchonneau N, Choqueuse D, Sauvant-Moynot V (2009)
Comprehensive analyses of syntactic foam behaviour in deepwater
environment. J Mater Sci 44(6):1462–1468
Guedes RM (2006) Lifetime predictions of polymer matrix composites
under constant or monotonic load. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf
37(5):703–715
Guedes RM (2008) Creep and fatigue lifetime prediction of polymer
matrix composites based on simple cumulative damage laws. Com-
pos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 39(11):1716–1725
Hardiman M, V aughan TJ, McCarthy CT (2016) The effects of pile-up,
viscoelasticity and hydrostatic stress on polymer matrix nanoin-
dentation. Polym Test 52:157–166
Helal M, Huang H, Wang D, Fathallah E (2019) Numerical analysis
of sandwich composite deep submarine pressure hull considering
failure criteria. J Mar Sci Eng 7(10):377
Jiyouping Y , Zuochao Z, Wentao Y (2023) Study on preparation and
properties of solid buoyancy materials by vacuum vibration cast-
ing. Compos Sci Eng (05):53–58
Keddie JL, Jones RAL, Cory RA (1994) Size-dependent depression of
the glass transition temperature in polymer ﬁlms. Europhys Lett
27(1):59
Kochetkov V A, Maksimov RD (1996) Water absorption and swelling
of glass/epoxy syntactic foams. Mech Compos Mater 32(1):61–70
Koyanagi J, Kiyota G, Kamiya T, Kawada H (2004) Prediction of
creep rupture in unidirectional composite: creep rupture model
with interfacial debonding and its propagation. Adv Compos Mater
13(3–4):199–213
Li L, Y u YF, Wu QL, Zhan GZ, Li SJ (2009) Effect of chemical structure
on the water sorption of amine-cured epoxy resins. Corros Sci
51(12):3000–3006
Liu Z, Zhai X, Liang X, Wang Q, Guo Y (2023a) Preparation and prop-
erties of ultralow density full ocean depth solid buoyancy material.
New Chem Mater 51(02):105–107
Liu F, Wang J, Zhang H, Y ao X (2023) Experimental and constitu-
tive analyses of the stress relaxation behavior of glassy polymers.
Polym Eng Sci 63(4):1215–1233
Long Y , Wang P , Li R, Wei H (2016) Preparation and performance
studies of HGM-epoxy resin solid buoyant material modiﬁed by
silane coupling agent. Total Corros Control 30(10):17–22
Mano JF, Gómez Ribelles JL, Alves NM, Salmerón Sanchez M (2005)
Glass transition dynamics and structural relaxation of PLLA stud-
ied by DSC: inﬂuence of crystallinity. Polymer 46(19):8258–8265
Moynihan CT, Macedo PB, Montrose CJ, Montrose CJ, Gupta PK,
DeBolt MA, Dill JF, Dom BE, Drake PW, Easteal AJ, Elterman
PB, Moeller RP , Sasabe H, Wilder JA (1976) Structural relaxation
in vitreous materials. Ann N Y Acad Sci 279(1):15–35
Papanicolaou GC, Xepapadaki AG, Karagounaki K, Zaoutsos SP (2008)
Time and temperature effect on the linear–nonlinear viscoelas-
tic transition threshold of a polymeric system. J Appl Polym Sci
108(1):640–649
Romanyk DL, Liu SS, Long R, Carey JP (2014) Considerations for
determining relaxation constants from creep modeling of nonlinear
suture tissue. Int J Mech Sci 85:179–186
Wang R (2006) IUTAM symposium on rheology of bodies with defects.
Springer, Dordrecht
Xu W, Zhang Q (2016) Overview of present status and develop-
ment trend of full ocean depth submersibles. Shipbuild China
57(02):206–221
Y ang TQ (1999) IUTAM symposium on rheology of bodies with
defects. Springer, Dordrecht
Zhang H, Zhang S (2023) Experimental study on mechanical properties
of high strength solid buoyancy materials under cyclic loading.
Compos Mater Sci Eng (8):72–77
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
123