Calcium imaging is a well-established method for studying neuronal activity and connectivity. It is routinely used to infer electrical activity across large populations of neurons in vivo and in vitro in place of, or alongside, more invasive and low-throughput electrophysiological recordings. The improved sensitivity of genetically-encoded calcium indicators allows the detection of subthreshold changes in intracellular calcium concentrations in neurons and their processes (Li et al., 2019). Synaptic calcium imaging can be achieved by imaging in a modified artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) solution that contains tetrodotoxin (TTX), to block action potentials, and 0 mM Mg 2+ , to remove the magnesium block of NMDA receptors (NMDARs). This allows NMDARs in dendritic spines to report spontaneous glutamate release from presynaptic vesicles by calcium influx into postsynaptic dendrites.The combination of 0 Mg 2+ and TTX was initially used in electrophysiological experiments to demonstrate that NMDARs are the primary glutamatergic receptors to flux calcium (Iino et al., 1990;Mayer et al., 1984). Removing magnesium to ungate NMDARs was then coopted for calcium imaging to study synaptic calcium transients in vivo in response to glutamate uncaging (Sobczyk et al., 2005). This method was later adapted to visualize synaptic calcium transients in vitro (Andreae and Burrone, 2015). Synaptic calcium imaging has been applied in vitro to investigate NMDAR trafficking and activity in developing dendrites (Andreae and Burrone, 2015), the effect of beta amyloid (Prikhodko et al., 2024;Sinnen et al., 2016), and the effect of a patient-derived NMDAR autoantibody (Dean et al., 2022) on synaptic calcium transients, for example.Despite the adoption of this method by multiple research groups, the analysis of synaptic calcium imaging recordings has remained lowthroughput. To the best of our knowledge, all previous uses of this method have relied on either manual or semi-manual approaches to identify potential synaptic regions of interest (ROIs) in combination with custom-written code and software for analysis. Other publications analyzing spontaneous synaptic calcium transients used FIJI for manual ROI detection, Clampex for extraction of fluorescence signal and MATLAB for analysis (Dean et al., 2022;Metzbower et al., 2019), FIJI for manual ROI detection and MetaMorph for extraction of fluorescence signal and analysis (Sinnen et al., 2016;Prikhodko et al., 2024), or manual ROI detection and MATLAB analysis in combination with MiniAnalysis software from Synaptosoft (Andreae and Burrone, 2015;Walker et al., 2017). These manual methods are not only time-and labor-intensive but also susceptible to user bias and may potentially miss small, nuanced changes in synaptic activity due to small sample sizes. Manual identification of ROIs is also incompatible with larger datasets, leaving previous studies to rely on, at most, datasets of 1,000-2,000 synapses per experimental condi