The problem: Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) have the potential to devastate communities and economies, through loss of jobs, tourism, real estate prices, food and acute and chronic adverse human health effects. For aquatic ecosystems, such as the Great Lakes, this can be of the order of billions of dollars. Protecting these water sources from such blooms requires a low-cost scalable approach. Although algicidal chemicals may control blooms, they are unlikely to achieve the control necessary in marine systems and waterbodies such as the Great Lakes as they require constant application. Conversely, biological formulations of organisms can degrade HAB cells and toxins and continue to proliferate in waterbodies and control HABs long than chemical control systems. Project objectives: This proposal aims to investigate whether a commercially available formulation of microbes (Micromix Aqua, MA) that has previously been approved for use cleaning oil spills and are efficacious for cleaning up slaughterhouse waste can be applied to HABs and their toxins, in particular cyanobacteria in the Great Lakes such as Lake Erie, and Karenia brevis, frequently found in marine environments around the gulf states such as Florida. Further experiments will examine the effect of MA on extant bacterial communities in these environments. As such formulations will be administered to waterbodies, studies will be undertaken to determine likely modes of application. Work to be completed: Our scientific objective is to determine the effect of MA on model HAB organisms from the Great Lakes (Microcystis aeruginosa) and marine environments (Karenia brevis) that produce microcystins and brevetoxins, respectively (Metcalf et al., 2021: Neurotoxicity Research 39.1 (2021): 27-35). This will be performed in batch culture, to examine effects of the formulation on HAB growth and toxin production. To investigate scaleability and the effective algistatic and algicidal concentrations, M. aeruginosa and K. brevis will be grown in chemostats and in mesocosms at BGSU at different MA doses. The variety of naturally occurring chemoheterotrophic bacteria from aquatic sources associated with these organisms will be assessed to determine whether any changes to these communities occur. As this commercial formulation has the potential to be applied to fresh- and marine waters, we will partner with end users on how best to deploy these materials to remediate blooms.