Modulation of CD73 by Betulinic acid antagonizes nucleotide metabolic dysregulation in silica nanoparticle-induced pulmonary fibrosis | Journal of Nanobiotechnology | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Nanobiotechnology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modulation of CD73 by Betulinic acid antagonizes nucleotide metabolic dysregulation in silica nanoparticle-induced pulmonary fibrosis 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 19 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal of Nanobiotechnology 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Modulation of CD73 by Betulinic acid antagonizes nucleotide metabolic dysregulation in silica nanoparticle-induced pulmonary fibrosis
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Jiaqi Ban 1   na1 , Lihong Ao 1   na1 , Hequn Gu 1   na1 , Xingyu Luo 1 , Xiu He 1 , Hua Zhao 1 , Yungeng Wei 2 & … Jun Li  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0002-4573-7260 1   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 54 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) exposure presents a growing public-health concern. The mechanisms driving SiNPs-induced pulmonary fibrosis and effective interventions remain unclear. This study investigated the contribution of CD73 to SiNPs-induced pulmonary fibrosis and evaluated the therapeutic mechanism of the natural compound Betulinic acid. We employed a mouse model of SiNPs-induced pulmonary fibrosis and achieved CD73 knockdown in mouse lung tissue via AAV5-mediated delivery. Fibrosis severity was evaluated by imaging, pulmonary function testing, and histopathology. We profiled metabolic alterations and interrogated the CD73-ADO-A2AR signaling axis and M2-macrophage polarization using untargeted metabolomics. Complementary in vitro experiments validated pathway function. Finally, the potential association between BA and CD73 and BA’s efficacy were assessed by network pharmacology, molecular docking, and in vitro functional assays. Metabolomic analysis revealed that SiNPs exposure disturbed nucleotide metabolism in mouse lung tissue. We therefore further explored the potential role of CD73, a nucleotide-metabolising enzyme, in SiNPs-triggered pulmonary fibrosis. Our results suggested that lung-wide CD73 knockdown attenuated lung-function impairment, reduced collagen deposition, and dampened SiNPs-induced macrophage M2-polarisation. SiNPs were found to up-regulate CD73, leading to ADO accumulation alongside increased A2AR expression, which may contribute to M2-macrophage polarisation, fibroblast activation and extracellular-matrix deposition. Betulinic acid (BA) ameliorated SiNPs-driven dysregulation within the CD73/ADO/A2AR pathway, reduced ADO accumulation, and suppressed subsequent macrophage M2-polarisation, thereby exerting anti-fibrotic effects in both in vitro and in vivo models. Together, these results suggest that SiNPs may drive macrophage M2-polarisation and pulmonary fibrosis partly through the CD73-ADO-A2AR axis, and that BA can dampen excessive activation of this pathway, representing a potential therapeutic strategy for SiNPs-related pulmonary fibrosis. Graphical abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Integration of bioinformatics analysis and experimental verification reveals the role of neutrophil extracellular traps in silica nanoparticles-induced lung injury
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 14 April 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Autophagic flux blockage in alveolar epithelial cells is essential in silica nanoparticle-induced pulmonary fibrosis
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 12 February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DsbA-L activates TGF-β1/SMAD3 signaling and M2 macrophage polarization by stimulating AKT1 and NLRP3 to promote pulmonary fibrosis
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 23 November 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Glycomics 
 
 
 
 RHO Signalling 
 
 
 
 Thioredoxins 
 
 
 
 Interstitial disease 
 
 
 
 Mechanism of Action 
 
 
 
 Therapeutics 
 
 
 
 Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Mechanisms and Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding This study was supported by Medical Research Joint Fund for High-Quality Development of health in Guizhou Province (grant number 2024GZYXKYJJXM0013) and The Guizhou Natural Science Foundation (grant number MS〔2026〕556) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 82660747). Author information Author notes Jiaqi Ban, Lihong Ao and Hequn Gu contributed equally. Authors and Affiliations School of Public Health, the Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution Monitoring and Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Guizhou Medical University, No.6 Ankang Road, Guian New Area, Guizhou, 561113, China Jiaqi Ban, Lihong Ao, Hequn Gu, Xingyu Luo, Xiu He, Hua Zhao & Jun Li State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Disease, National Center for Respiratory Medicine, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China Yungeng Wei Authors Jiaqi Ban View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lihong Ao View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Hequn Gu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xingyu Luo View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xiu He View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Hua Zhao View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yungeng Wei View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Jun Li View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Yungeng Wei or Jun Li . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Comepting interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary Material 1 (download DOCX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Ban, J., Ao, L., Gu, H. et al. Modulation of CD73 by Betulinic acid antagonizes nucleotide metabolic dysregulation in silica nanoparticle-induced pulmonary fibrosis.
 J Nanobiotechnol (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-026-05090-x Download citation Received : 23 February 2026 Accepted : 11 September 2026 Published : 19 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-026-05090-x Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Pulmonary fibrosis SiNPs Nucleotide metabolism disorder CD73 ADO Betulinic acid 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Jun Li 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature