In 2016-2017, the connecting channel “Tylihul Estuary - Black Sea” was reconstructed with the aim of improving the hydroecological status of the estuary by increasing its external water exchange with the sea. This article is devoted to analyzing changes in the hydroecological status of the estuary based on a set of hydrological, hydrochemical, and hydrobiological characteristics of its ecosystem that occurred after the reconstruction of the connecting channel. The comparative analysis is based on data obtained from monthly hydroecological monitoring of the estuary during 2025, as well as retrospective data on its hydroecological characteristics collected prior to the channel reconstruction. It was established that the reconstruction of the connecting channel did not achieve its main objective, as no decrease in water salinity in the estuary occurred as a result of intensified bidirectional water exchange with the sea. Concentrations of mineral and organic nitrogen and phosphorus in the estuary waters increased compared to the period before the reconstruction. Phytoplankton species diversity decreased, with a predominance of marine species; fish species diversity and catches in the estuary also declined. The state of the ichthyofauna and fish productivity of the estuary did not improve and remain unstable. The main reason for this is the discrepancy between the actual morphometric characteristics of the channel and the design specifications, non-compliance with established operational rules, and additionally, the construction of a new bridge crossing over the channel, which hindered water exchange between the estuary and the sea. By the end of June 2025, the average cross-sectional area of the channel was 2.8 times smaller than the design value, and the average depth was 2.2 times less than the design specification (2.0 m and 0.91 m, respectively). The general conclusion is that the reconstruction of the “sea-estuary” connecting channel carried out in 2016-2017 did not achieve its intended goal. Recommendations are provided for measures to improve the current hydroecological status of the Tylihul Estuary.