A few pages into Lydia Millet’s 2020 novel A Children’s Bible, the narrator Evie, a teenage girl spending the summer in a spacious rented house with her parents, her younger brother, and several other families, finds herself confronting, in deeply personal terms, the end of the world as she knows it—“[t]he familiar world, anyway” (27). Such experiences of ecological precarity and intergenerational political failure, experienced by young people confronting the climate crisis, have become a driving force behind the global youth climate movement, fueled by a profound sense of indignation and urgent anger. A particularly striking example comes from Greta Thunberg’s speech at the 2019 UN Climate Action Summit, which reveals the “moral outrage” (Antadze) of an entire generation: This is all wrong. I shouldn’t be up here. I should be back in school on the other side of the ocean. Yet you all come to us young people for hope. How dare you! You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words. And yet I’m one of the lucky ones. People are suffering. People are dying. Entire ecosystems are collapsing. We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth. How dare you! Her final exclamation—“How dare you?”—functions as a direct political accusation, transforming personal fear and grief into a collective ethical claim and holding those in power accountable for the futures they have jeopardized. Moral outrage, as Nino Antadze notes, is a justified emotional response to climate injustice that has the potential to foster “collective political action” (24). Unlike self-focused anger, it is directed toward identifiable targets: political agents, policies, or systemic structures responsible for inequality and harm. In this sense, the indignation expressed by young activists illustrates how climate anxiety can take on a collective, politically charged dimension. Against this affective and political backdrop, this article examines how contemporary climate fiction1 mobilizes narrative form to transform climate distress from a private psychological condition into a socially and politically legible experience tied to questions of justice, inequality, and collective responsibility. Focusing on Millet’s A Children’s Bible and Imbolo Mbue’s How Beautiful We Were (2021), I argue that this shift is mediated through a set of formal strategies that foreground the relationship between individual affect and collective consciousness. Both novels function as climate Bildungsroman (Mahajan), tracing the moral and emotional development of young protagonists confronting intertwined ecological, social, and political crises. They also mobilize a set of narrative strategies that, drawing on econarratological insights—the critical intersection of narratology and the environmental humanities (James)—mediate the shift from individual experiences of climate distress to a collective understanding attentive t