Dynamic shifts in rhizosphere bacterial microbiota mediated by soil nutrient limitations across developmental stages in potato | BMC Microbiology | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Microbiology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dynamic shifts in rhizosphere bacterial microbiota mediated by soil nutrient limitations across developmental stages in potato 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 30 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Microbiology 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dynamic shifts in rhizosphere bacterial microbiota mediated by soil nutrient limitations across developmental stages in potato
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Changsheng Yang 1 , 2   na1 , Shuai Luo 2   na1 , Yang Zhong 2   na1 , Fancheng Zeng 2 , 3 , 4 , Yiming Zhong 2 , 3 , 4 , Xingyao Xiong 2 , 3 , 4 , Zhiyuan Tan 1 & … Xu Cheng 2   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background Soil fertility critically influences plant growth and development and governs the dynamic shifts of rhizosphere microbial communities. Method To clarify the influence of soil fertility on the microbial aggregation in the rhizosphere of potatoes, we predicted the composition and functional changes of the rhizosphere microbial community by high-throughput sequencing of 16S rRNA in potato rhizosphere samples at different fertility levels and three growth stages. Result Here, we demonstrate that potato growth traits varied depending on soil fertility levels, with higher fertility improving plant growth and tuber yield. Amplicon sequencing of potato rhizosphere samples across different soil fertility levels and three growth stages revealed that α-diversity and β-diversity were primarily driven by soil fertility rather than plant developmental stage. The assembly process of rhizosphere microbial community was dominated by stochastic processes. Furthermore, increasing soil fertility enhanced the complexity of microbial interactions, as indicated by co-occurrence network analyses. We further identified Sphingobium , Mucilaginibacter , Sphingomonas , and Streptomyces as conserved biomarker genera distinguishing the three fertility treatments. Additionally, soil total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN), available nitrogen (AN), and total phosphorus (TP) showed significant positive correlations with Mucilaginibacter abundance but negative correlations with Sphingobium . The growth promoting effects of Sphingobium on potato plants were also tested. These findings provide crucial insights into the regulatory mechanisms of soil fertility on plant–microbe interactions and offer a scientific basis for optimizing crop production and soil health through fertility management strategies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Changes in the potato rhizosphere microbiota richness and diversity occur in a growth stage-dependent manner
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 17 January 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Effect of biochar with fertilizer on potato yield and soil quality
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 09 September 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbial community changes in different underground compartments of potato affected yield and quality
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 07 April 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Microbial Communities 
 
 
 
 Microbial Ecology 
 
 
 
 Rhizobial symbiosis 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 Soil Microbiology 
 
 
 
 Microbiota 
 
 
 
 Rhizosphere Microbiome Interactions in Plant Systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgments The project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31970001) and the Innovation Program of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS-CSAL-202301). Funding The project is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31970001). Author information Author notes Changsheng Yang, Shuai Luo and Yang Zhong contributed equally to this work. Authors and Affiliations Provincial Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Breeding, College of Agriculture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 510642, China Changsheng Yang & Zhiyuan Tan Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 518120, China Changsheng Yang, Shuai Luo, Yang Zhong, Fancheng Zeng, Yiming Zhong, Xingyao Xiong & Xu Cheng Hunan Provincial Engineering Research Center for Potatoes, College of Horticulture, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, 410128, China Fancheng Zeng, Yiming Zhong & Xingyao Xiong Yuelushan Laboratory, Changsha, 410128, China Fancheng Zeng, Yiming Zhong & Xingyao Xiong Authors Changsheng Yang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Shuai Luo View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yang Zhong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Fancheng Zeng View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yiming Zhong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xingyao Xiong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Zhiyuan Tan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xu Cheng View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Zhiyuan Tan . Ethics declarations 
 
 Declarations 
 The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Supplementary Material 1. (download DOCX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Yang, C., Luo, S., Zhong, Y. et al. Dynamic shifts in rhizosphere bacterial microbiota mediated by soil nutrient limitations across developmental stages in potato.
 BMC Microbiol (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-026-05476-9 Download citation Received : 15 January 2026 Accepted : 28 July 2026 Published : 30 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-026-05476-9 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Soil fertility Potato development stages Rhizosphere microbiota Biomarker genera 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Zhiyuan Tan 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature