Climate change has evolved into one of the biggest global challenges of the twenty first century reshaping ecological systems and social conditions with wide-ranging implications for human wellbeing. Bhutan offers a distinct context to explore interactions between climate change and wellbeing as it remains guided by its wellbeing-centred development philosophy of Gross National Happiness (GNH). At the same time, it remains highly vulnerable to climate change despite being the only carbon negative country in the world. Nonetheless, the intersections between climate change and GNH have not been systematically explored. This research aims to explore the relationship between climate change and wellbeing through Bhutan’s pursuit of GNH and it is guided by three research questions: i) How does climate change affect the wellbeing of communities and how do communities address climate change? ii) What role does the GNH framework play in addressing the impacts of climate change? and iii) What are the opportunities to better incorporate climate change into the GNH framework? Drawing on a qualitative design, the research integrates systematic literature reviews, semi structured interviews, document analysis, and synthesis in exploring the research questions. The first research question is addressed through two systematic literature reviews of global literature to examine the relationship between climate change and community wellbeing and the role of Indigenous Knowledge (IK) in climate adaptation and resilience. Key findings show that climate change impacts on wellbeing are complex and multidimensional. Addressing these requires adaptation and resilience strategies that are socially just, locally grounded, context specific, and holistic. Further, where Indigenous Peoples are involved, key additional climate change considerations for wellbeing and adaptation are that IK offers local and time-tested adaptive approaches for managing land, water, agriculture, and biodiversity to deal with climate impacts with substantial implications for wellbeing. It requires more holistic approaches to development and shows that wellbeing and resilience are mutually reinforcing – wellbeing of communities is more sustainable when it has the capacity to adapt, and communities adapt more effectively when wellbeing exists. This reciprocal relationship shows that wellbeing should be a core component in designing and assessing climate action contrary to the conventional separation of climate action and wellbeing studies. The insights point to the need to integrate climate change and wellbeing objectives by adopting strategies that are context-specific and socially equitable. The second research question is addressed through semi-structured interviews with 41 Bhutanese policy influencers - including politicians, civil servants, experts from Non- Government Organisations, and media professionals. GNH is evaluated as a development model and governance tool exploring Bhutan’s experience