Vol.:(0123456789)
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40831-026-01608-7
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Assessing Iron Ore Pellet Quality Parameters for Optimized 
Performance Across Pellet‑Based Furnace Operations
Leonardo Tomas da Rocha1  · Seongkyu Cho2 · Jung‑Ah Kim3 · Kyoung‑Oh Jang4 · Sung‑Mo Jung1 
Received: 3 May 2026 / Accepted: 12 July 2026 
© The Author(s) 2026
Abstract
The increasing use of iron ore pellets as a substitute for sinter in the blast furnace is a promising strategy to reduce CO2 
emission from the steel industry. However, the diverse chemical composition and physical characteristics of commercially 
available pellets can significantly affect their behavior in the furnace conditions. The current study investigated the effects 
of key pellet parameters—total iron (T. Fe) content, Al2O3 and MgO content, basicity (B 2), porosity and pellet size—on 
physicochemical properties. Cold compressive strength (CCS), reduction degradation index (RDI), reducibility, and swelling 
index were evaluated for several pellet brands of inherently different composition. The results indicated that pellet perfor -
mance cannot be estimated solely on the basis of chemical composition and mechanical strength. Although one pellet brand 
exhibited superior CCS, it showed inferior reducibility and excessive swelling, highlighting the importance of considering 
in-furnace behavior during pellet selection. Multiple linear regression (MLR) equations were developed as an exploratory 
statistical approach to estimate the relative influence of pellet characteristics with the investigated commercial dataset. Within 
the dataset, favorable performance was generally associated with lower MgO, moderate B 2, and porosity near 20%. Addi-
tionally, the pellet size was found to play a critical role: larger pellets improved mechanical strength and swelling behavior, 
while smaller pellets enhanced reducibility and RDI performance. An intermediate pellet size ranging from 9.5 to 12 mm 
was identified to be optimal. The findings might provide practical guidance for pellet selection and design in high-pellet 
furnace operations, supporting both operational stability and emission reduction goals.
The contributing editor for this article was M. Akbar Rhamdhani.
 * Sung-Mo Jung 
 smjung@postech.ac.kr
1 Graduate Institute of Ferrous & Eco Materials Technology 
(GIFT), Pohang University of Science and Technology 
(POSTECH), Pohang 37673, Republic of Korea
2 Ironmaking Research Group, Technical Research Lab., 
POSCO, Gwangyang 57807, Republic of Korea
3 Ironmaking Research Group, Technical Research Lab., 
POSCO, Pohang 37763, Republic of Korea
4 Rio Tinto Korea Ltd., Seoul 06158, Republic of Korea
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
Graphical Abstract
Keywords Iron ore pellets · Pellet quality · Physicochemical properties
Introduction
The steel industry accounts for approximately 7% of total 
global CO2 emission [1 , 2]. Among the various steelmak -
ing processes, more than 80% of CO2 emissions originate 
from the ironmaking stage, which includes the blast fur -
nace, sinter plant, and coke oven [3 ]. The blast furnace is 
the largest source of CO2 in steel plants, accounting for 
over 50% of total emissions, and remain as the predomi-
nant route of global steel production, representing about 
70% of global output [4 ].
One potential strategy to mitigate the high level of emis-
sion from the blast furnace is the replacement of raw materi-
als. Iron ore sinter is the major iron-bearing material charged 
into blast furnaces, especially in China, South Korea, and 
Japan [5]. Replacement of sinter with iron ore pellets offers 
several advantages, including uniform size distribution, 
improved reducibility and permeability, higher Fe content, 
and larger mechanical strength [6, 7]. These benefits can lead 
to the improved performance of the blast furnace including 
fuel efficiency.
The substitution of pellets for iron ore sinters is of 
great importance, which results in a significant reduction 
in CO2 emissions from the agglomeration process of iron 
ores [7 –9]. According to analyses by Lv et al. [7 ], the 
production of iron ore sinter generates approximately 4 
times more greenhouse gases than that of iron ore pel -
lets. Additionally, owing to the superior reducibility of 
pellets compared with ore sinter by solid fuel [7 , 10], the 
amount of coke required for the blast furnace operation 
can be expected to decrease, further contributing to lower 
 CO2 emissions. However, as the utilization of pellets in 
the blast furnace is anticipated to increase, it is necessary 
to investigate how this shift may affect key operational 
characteristics such as the formation of the cohesive zone, 
pressure drop, and s -value during high-pellet operations 
[11, 12]. As an example, pellets generally have lower 
basicity than iron ore sinter. As the substitution ratio of 
pellets for sinter increases, the overall basicity of the iron 
burden decreases, which requires to take compensatory 
measures to maintain a similar smooth operation, espe -
cially in terms of slagging properties.
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
Another important factor to be considered in the high utili-
zation of iron ore pellets in the blast furnace is the diversity of 
raw materials. Pellets are manufactured from different iron ore 
sources, which results in a wide range of chemical composition, 
especially in terms of total Fe, SiO2, Al2O3, CaO, and MgO. 
Consequently, the parameters such as basicity and porosity will 
also be affected by the type of iron ore used during the pelletiz-
ing process. As a result of this diversity, the behavior of iron ore 
pellet will be drastically distinct, which might affect the smooth 
operation of blast furnace. Several studies have been already 
done to understand the effect of some pellet parameters such 
as gangue content, basicity, and porosity on the iron ore pellet 
properties such as TI, CCS, RDI, RI, and swelling behavior 
[13–17]. However, most of the previous studies used a single 
pellet brand as raw material, and varied the numbers of the 
parameters to be investigated. For example, the pellet has a fixed 
basicity, but CaO was added to the pellet at different content to 
understand the effect of basicity on the pellet properties.
As is different from the previous research, the current study 
evaluated the physicochemical properties of various pellet 
brands including mechanical strength, low-temperature degra-
dation, reducibility, and swelling in views of the difference in 
chemical composition such as Fe2O3, basicity, Al2O3, and MgO. 
This investigation would tend to optimize the selection criteria 
for iron ore pellets to be highly used in the reactors without com-
promising their smooth operation. This study aims to serve as 
foundational data for future strategies for high-pellet operation.
Experimental
Materials Preparation
The samples used in this study were iron ore pellets of 
several brands originating from diverse regions in the 
world, manufactured from different pelletizing compa-
nies. In total, ten brands of iron ore pellets were received 
directly from steel plants and used, as shown in Table  1, 
which summarizes the chemical composition of each 
brand. The samples were analyzed by wet chemical titra -
tion [18], in terms of T. Fe content, and inductively cou-
pled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) 
[19], in terms of the metal oxides with exception to 
 Fe2O3. As the iron ores used to manufacture the pellets 
originated from different parts of the world, their chemi-
cal composition was very diverse with special focus on 
the gangue components such as SiO2, Al2O3, CaO, and 
MgO. As a consequence, such discrepancy in the chemi-
cal composition affects other parameters such as basicity, 
melting behavior, and viscosity. Some important high-
lights should be made from Table  1. The SiO2 content of 
brand H, the Al2O3 content of brand C, the MgO content 
of brands A and G, and the basicity (B 2) of brand I. The 
aforementioned values are the most discrepant from the 
averaged chemical composition of iron ore pellets. It is 
also important to note that the T. Fe content of all pellet 
brands used in this study falls into the identical range, 
which belongs to the higher grade of iron ore pellets com-
pared with iron ore sinter which mostly contains a T. Fe 
content below 60 wt% [20].
It is important to mention again that this study did not 
prepare the pellets, and the samples were received already 
in their final stage, ready to be charged, from the major sup-
pliers of steel plants. These ten kinds of pellets represent 
most of the iron ore pellets being charged into blast furnaces 
worldwide. Therefore, to highlight an important part that 
the authors are sure is essential to understand the mechani-
cal behavior of pellets, this study did not have access to the 
pelletizing conditions, such as temperature, time, and atmos-
phere of firing steps, of each pellet, as this is considered a 
Table 1 Chemical composition of the iron ore pellets used (wt%)
*Fe2O3 was evaluated by simple assumption that all T. Fe refers to Fe3+
*B2 refers to the CaO/SiO2 ratio
*B4 represents the (CaO + MgO)/(SiO2 + Al2O3) ratio
Pellet brands T. Fe Fe2O3 SiO2 Al2O3 CaO MgO B2 B4 Theoretical oxygen 
that can be removed
A 65.50 93.57 2.27 0.59 2.23 0.75 0.98 1.04 28.12
B 66.50 95.00 3.09 0.64 1.29 0.06 0.42 0.36 28.55
C 64.50 92.14 2.97 1.55 2.39 0.08 0.80 0.55 27.69
D 66.90 95.57 1.58 0.34 1.72 0.32 1.09 1.06 28.72
E 65.80 94.00 2.50 0.45 2.52 0.09 1.01 0.88 28.25
F 66.30 94.71 2.26 0.59 1.76 0.20 0.78 0.69 28.47
G 66.50 95.00 2.56 0.42 0.12 2.24 0.05 0.79 28.55
H 65.62 93.44 4.46 0.40 1.09 0.31 0.24 0.29 28.08
I 67.23 95.91 1.20 0.37 1.72 0.26 1.43 1.26 28.83
J 67.79 96.72 1.25 0.38 0.96 0.33 0.76 0.79 29.07
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
company procedure to prepare their own products. How -
ever, this study does know that the pelletizing conditions are 
important factors affecting the pellet quality.
The further discussion relied mostly on the bulk chemical 
composition of the pellets, other than the mineral phases spe-
cially formed by the gangue components, as the major phase 
present in all pellet brands was found to be Fe2O3. As is known, 
the pelletizing process contains a firing step, with the target 
being to oxidize any of Fe3O4 present in the iron ore into Fe2O3 
when magnetite ore is used as the raw material. According to 
the analysis, some of the received samples (pellets B, E, G, 
and I) in terms of X-ray diffraction (XRD), the major distinct 
phase found among the analyzed pellets was only observed for 
brand G, which showed a slight presence of magnesioferrite 
(MgO⋅Fe2O3) in their composition due to the considerable pres-
ence of MgO. This presence was highlighted by the shift in some 
of the Fe2O3 peaks to the right side, because of the distortion 
in the crystal structure promoted by the presence of MgO. The 
XRD analysis can be found in the online supplementary mate-
rial, labelled as Fig. S1.
Experimental Procedure
The current research evaluated several properties of different 
brands of iron ore pellets. Firstly, it was attempted to meas-
ure the porosity of each pellet brand. Then, the mechani-
cal strength in terms of cold compressive strength (CCS), 
reduction disintegration index (RDI), reduction degree, 
and swelling behavior were evaluated. The final objectives 
were to assess how the diverse variables of pellets, such as 
chemical composition and porosity, affect the major quality 
parameters of pellets for enhancing higher utilization in the 
reduction furnaces. The selected pellet size for this investi-
gation was between 13 and 16 mm.
The porosity of iron ore pellets was evaluated in terms 
of image analysis by applying ImageJ software. Such a 
method was selected to estimate the porosity of iron ore 
pellet instead of the mercury porosimeter technique as the 
sample used for mercury porosimeter analysis is a small par-
ticle, which does not represent the total porosity of the pel-
let. However, the cross-sectional image analysis of the iron 
ore pellet analyzed the total region of the pellet with more 
reliable data. Figure  1 summarizes the stepwise procedure 
to evaluate the porosity of pellets by image analysis. From 
the original cross-sectional image of each pellet, the dark 
points are removed from the pellet area, and their ratio was 
evaluated to be porosity.
The cold compressive strength (CCS) was evaluated by 
ISO 4700 [21] in terms of loading velocity, with a modifica-
tion in the amount of pellets tested. The standard requires 60 
pellets, while this study analyzed the average value of about 
10 pellets employing an Instron tester machine.
The reduction disintegration index (RDI) was evaluated 
according to ISO 4696-2 [22] in terms of temperature and 
gas composition of the test. Then, the reduction disintegra-
tion test was performed to evaluate the strength of pellet 
which were subjected to the low-temperature reduction 
process for simulating the upper part of the blast furnace. 
About 10 pellets were non-isothermally heated at a rate 
of 100 °C/min from room temperature to 550 °C in a N2 
atmosphere in a horizontal gold-image furnace. After the 
target temperature was reached, the gas composition was 
changed to 70 vol% N2 and 30 vol% CO or H2, and the sam-
ple was kept at a flow rate of 1 L/min for 30 min. After the 
samples were cooled to room temperature, the total weight 
was measured. Then, the samples were tumbled at 60 rpm 
for 15 min. Finally, the samples were sieved in different 
Fig. 1 Evaluation method for the porosity of iron ore pellets in terms 
of cross-sectional image analysis. a Image from a random pellet 
cross-section; b image adjusted by the brightness/contrast for an eas-
ier differentiation between the dark and grey points; and c red-colored 
region determining the total area of the cross-section, while the dark 
points represent the pores present in the cross-section area. Porosity is 
evaluated by quantifying the fraction of these dark points in the red-
colored region (dense pellet)
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
aperture sizes such as 3.15 and 0.5 mm. The RDI +3.15 mm 
was evaluated as the weight of samples with a particle size 
bigger than 3.15 mm, as represented by Eq. [1 ].
where m0 is the weight of the reduced sample before tum-
bling (g) and m 1 is the weight of samples retained in the 
sieves of 3.15 mm (g).
The reduction tests were carried out to measure the 
amount of oxygen removed from the pellets by indirect 
reduction with CO and H2 gases, as represented by Reactions 
(2) and (3). One pellet for each brand was non-isothermally 
(1)RDI+3.15mm (% )= m 1
m 0
× 100
heated at a rate of 10 °C/min from room temperature to 
900 °C in a N2 atmosphere in a vertical thermogravimetric 
analysis (TGA, Rubotherm, Bochum, Germany). After the 
target temperature was reached, the gas composition was 
changed to 70 vol% N2 and 30 vol% CO or H2, and then 
the sample was kept at a flow rate of 1 L/min for 3 h. The 
gas composition and temperature profile defined for this test 
followed a standardized method [23]. The experiments were 
carried out twice for repeatability, and the results were aver-
aged. The percentage degree of reduction (R t) of the pellet 
was evaluated according to Eq. (4):
(2)Fe2O 3(s) + 3CO (g) = 2Fe(s) + 3CO 2(g)
Fig. 2 a Porosity of several brands of iron ore pellets and b pore structure view by the cross-sectional images of some brands of iron ore pellets
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
where w1 is the T. Fe content in the pellet before reduction 
(wt%), m0 is the weight of the pellet before heating (g), and 
mt is the weight of the pellet after a certain reduction time 
(g).
The swelling behavior was evaluated by measuring the 
change in the pellet volume by indirect reduction with CO 
gas. One pellet for each brand was non-isothermally heated at 
a rate of 10 °C/min from room temperature to 900 °C in a N2 
atmosphere in a horizontal gold-image furnace. After the target 
temperature was reached, the gas composition was changed to 
70 vol% N2 and 30 vol% CO, and then the sample was kept at 
a flow rate of 1 L/min for 30 min. Before being charged into 
the reactor, each pellet had its diameter measured at three dif-
ferent points, and the averaged value was considered as the 
pellet diameter, which is then used to calculate the volume of 
pellet under the assumption that the pellets are perfect spheres 
( Volume = 4
3 /u1D70Br3 ). The same procedure to evaluate the diam-
eter of pellets was applied after the experiment. The swelling 
index of the pellet was evaluated according to Eq. (5):
where Vi is the initial volume of pellet before swelling test 
 (mm3), and V f is the final volume of pellet after swelling 
test (mm3).
Results and Discussion
Evaluation of Properties of Several Brands of Iron 
Ore Pellets
Ten brands of commercial iron ore pellets were analyzed 
for their properties such as porosity, CCS, RDI, reduction 
degree, and swelling index. It is necessary to understand 
the effect of different sources on the major properties of 
pellets prior to their use in the blast and/or shaft furnaces. 
This study focused on empirical trends mostly based on 
bulk chemical composition of the iron ore pellets, without 
deep investigation on cracks and pores shapes/sizes, phase 
evolution during reduction, and metallic iron morphology 
after experiments involving reduction procedure. However, 
the authors do know that the characterizations will signifi -
cantly contribute to the understanding of commercial iron 
ore pellets behavior before being highly charged in the 
reactors to produce pig iron and DRI. The authors consider 
this study as a first chapter of a long topic of interest.
(3)Fe2O 3(s) + 3H 2(g) = 2Fe(s) + 3H 2O(g)
(4)Rt(% )=[ m0 − mt
m0 × 0.43w1
× 100]× 100
(5)Swelling index(% )= Vf − Vi
Vi
× 100
Porosity
Figure  2a summarizes the porosity level of each iron ore 
pellet. According to the values shown, porosity of pellets 
ranged from 13.1 to 25.0%, with the lowest porosity being 
attributed to pellet B, while the highest level to pellet J. Two 
of the main factors controlling the porosity of pellets might 
be related to the pelletizing process, especially to the fir -
ing conditions and moisture content adopted by each pel-
letizing company [24]. Therefore, as these steps are very 
critical for the final pellet quality, it is not easy to obtain 
the details for the preheating and firing temperatures and 
time, cooling method, moisture content, and so on. However, 
this study tried to correlate the porosity level of pellets with 
an important parameter obtained by the amount of gangue 
components in their composition; basicity (B2). B2 might be 
considered a crucial factor, as the potential phases might be 
different according to their level. For example, at a lower 
level, the presence of Fe2O3 and SiO2, in a middle level, the 
appearance of calcium silicates and finally, at higher levels, 
the formation of calcium ferrites [13, 16]. The aforemen-
tioned phases have distinct melting temperature and viscos-
ity, which might play a determined role during the firing 
process, leading to less or more pores. In addition, although 
not deeply investigated in this study, the pore structure is a 
determinant factor for the final quality of the iron ore pel -
lets, especially in terms of pore size, shape, connectivity, 
and so on. Figure 2b provides an overview of the difference 
in between the cross-sectional analysis of some pellets used 
in this study. The major purpose is to confirm that the pel-
lets will have their distinct morphology at the similar poros-
ity level. As previously mentioned, the company-specific 
pelletizing conditions are surely distinct, which results in 
Fig. 3 Relationship between porosity and basicity (B2)
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
significant change in the morphology of the pellets. Such 
differences might contribute to the final pellet properties 
even at similar porosity level. Unfortunately, such a factor 
cannot be further investigated. Through a detailed analysis 
of Fig. 2b, it is possible to differentiate the pore structure of 
the iron ore pellets. Pellet A showed a more concentrated 
porosity in the nuclei region, while pellet C and pellet E 
showed a more distributed porosity throughout the whole 
area. Pellet B presented a high densification that explains 
its low porosity. Pellet G, although containing a low poros-
ity, showed an elongated and irregular shape of the pores, 
which might compromise its mechanical properties. In addi-
tion, the blue boxes marked at different regions represent 
the sample areas to be analyzed in case the pellet poros-
ity might be evaluated by a mercury porosimeter. Since the 
required sampling amount is small, the results might have 
been distorted from the real situation. That is the reason for 
the selection of cross-sectional analysis for the porosity level 
as an alternative tool.
Figure 3 summarizes the relationship between the poros-
ity of pellets and their basicity. In the figure, the porosity 
started to increase with increasing basicity around 0.5, 
followed by a decrease in basicity around 1.0 [16]. The 
lower viscosity of calcium ferrite when compared with 
calcium silicates might be a significant factor in reducing 
the amount of pores, especially during the cooling after the 
firing heat treatment employed to the iron ore pellets. In 
case of extremely acidic pellets, a dense structure could be 
obtained due to the major presence of Fe2O3 as a single 
phase. Similarly, Chai et al. [25] correlated the porosity 
of pellets with the basicity level, showing that the highest 
porosity was obtained in the range from 0.4 to 1.0, and then 
followed by a decrease. The explanation for this behavior 
was through the amount of liquid phase, where the pellets 
with lower amounts of liquid phase showed a higher poros-
ity, limiting the densification of the structure. Interestingly, 
the pelletizing conditions are also determinant factors to the 
final structure of pellets. A single variable, such as basicity, 
might affect the porosity as previously explained, in case all 
the other variables are constant. That is the interesting point 
of this study, to analyze and understand the pellets behavior 
for real samples, when the variables are not constant, which 
provides an investigation closer to the real application.
Cold Compressive Strength (CCS)
Figure 4 summarizes the cold compressive strength for the 
pellets. Firstly, it is necessary to mention that all brands are 
over the minimum requirement to be charged into blast fur-
naces, which is around 2 kN [26, 27]. Therefore, through the 
obtained results, the strongest pellet brand was found to be 
brand B, while the weakest was brand F. According to previ-
ous studies [13–17], several factors such as gangue compo-
nents and porosity might affect the mechanical strength of 
iron ore pellets. That is the reason for this study to compare 
the results obtained in Fig. 4 for the CCS with some param-
eters, which includes T. Fe, Al2O3 and MgO contents, basic-
ity level (B2), and porosity level.
Figure 5 summarizes the relationship between cold com-
pressive strength and the previously cited parameters. Each 
data point marked in the graphs represents an averaged value 
of ten pellets chosen randomly from the received package. 
Although the trend might not be so clear for T. Fe and Al2O3 
contents and basicity B2 due to the complex chemical com-
position of pellets, it could be concluded that lower MgO 
content and lower porosity are desired to achieve higher val-
ues of pellet strength. Higher mechanical strength is mostly 
related to the densification of the pellet microstructure. A 
lower porosity value promotes more densified structure, 
which is decisive to improve the pellet strength, while a 
lower MgO content promotes a higher stabilization of sin-
gle-phase other than the presence of a dual-phase structure 
(hematite −  Fe2O3 + magnesioferrite − MgO⋅ Fe2O3) [28, 
29].
Reduction Disintegration Index (RDI)
Figure  6 summarizes RDI+3.15 mm of the iron ore pellets 
in terms of CO and H2 gases as reducing agents. The first 
notable highlight is that brand G pellet showed the worst 
RDI+3.15 mm values independent of the reducing gas used. 
In the case of the best one, some changes were observed 
when using CO or H2. Brand F in the case of CO gas and 
brand B in case of H2. Moreover, the current study aimed 
to understand the differences in the RDI +3.15 mm behavior 
by using both gases. Figure  7 summarizes the relationship 
Fig. 4 Cold compressive strength (CCS) of several brands of iron ore 
pellets
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
between RDI+3.15 mm by CO and H2 with the reduction 
degree obtained after the RDI experiments. Although the 
linear fitting does not seem to be reliable due to low R 2 
values, it is interesting to take an overlook on the data 
points, to point out that the RDI +3.15 mm trend with reduc-
tion degree was different for both gases. As the reduction 
degree increased, the RDI +3.15 mm by CO gas was improved 
while those by H2 gas was deteriorated. A similar trend 
was found by Mizutani et al. [30], and the possible reason 
for such a behavior is that the reduction by CO gas fol-
lows a topochemical reaction, promoting a dense reduced 
layer in the outer shell, while the reduction by H2 does not 
follow a topochemical reaction, and nucleates throughout 
the whole inner area of the pellet, generating significant 
amount of cracks.
Figure  8 summarizes the relationship between 
RDI+3.15 mm and pellet parameters. Each data point marked 
in the graphs represents one test conducted with about ten 
pellets chosen randomly from the received package. A 
higher T. Fe was not desired to improve the RDI +3.15 mm as 
more Fe2O3 would transform into Fe3O4 during the exper -
iment, which causes significant volume expansion and 
consequent cracks [31, 32]. The presence of MgO in the 
pellet deteriorated the RDI +3.15 mm value due to the stabi-
lization of Fe3O4 phase as magnesioferrite (MgO⋅ Fe2O3) 
or because of the increase in the pore size promoted by 
MgO [14]. An increased basicity of pellets also deterio-
rated the RDI +3.15 mm value as silicates are stable during 
reduction and when the basicity is increased, the major 
bonding phase is shifted from calcium silicates to calcium 
Fig. 5 Effect of different iron 
ore pellet parameters on CCS: a 
T. Fe content, b Al2O3 content, 
c MgO content, d basicity B2, 
and e porosity
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
ferrites. Then, during reduction, the hematite present in 
the calcium ferrites was also reduced, generating voids 
and cracks [13]. Al2O3 content does not strongly affect the 
RDI of the pellets. The effect of porosity follows a similar 
trend observed in Fig.  7, where higher porosity might lead 
to higher reduction degree and, consequently, a positive 
effect was found in the case of CO used as a reducing gas, 
while a negative effect resulted in the case of H2.
Reduction Degree (Rt)
Figure 9 summarizes the reduction degree of iron ore pel-
let brands in terms of CO and H2 gases as reducing agents. 
The reduction behavior of pellets by CO gas showed a 
clear diversity in the results depending on the pellet brand, 
while the reduction done by H2 had a negligible depend-
ence on the pellet brand. As shown, the reduction degrees 
obtained by H2 as reducing gas were in the similar range—
all over 95%, which confirms the reducing strength of H2 
compared with CO. The highest reduction degree in terms 
of CO gas was obtained by brand I, while the lowest was 
obtained by brand B. The reduction of iron ore pellets by 
CO was highly affected by a combination of factors such 
as T. Fe (Fe2O3 content), Al2O3 and MgO content, poros-
ity, and basicity, as shown in Fig.  10. A higher amount of 
T. Fe is positive for the reduction degree since a greater 
amount of Fe2O3 is present, and consequently more oxy -
gen is available to be removed from the sample. A higher 
porosity level is also important for the reduction by CO 
since more channels for the gas to diffuse into the unre -
acted oxides are available. In the case of basicity, it could 
be explained as the calcium ferrite phase contributes to 
the progress in reduction, or the reducibility of this cal-
cium ferrite phase is higher than that of silicates or single 
hematite [33]. That is the reason that higher basicity is 
preferred. The presence of MgO is not beneficial for the 
reduction of iron ore pellets because MgO tends to sta -
bilize as magnesioferrite, which is an intermediate com -
pound formed in between hematite and wustite/metallic 
iron [34]. As is similar to the results obtained for RDI 
tests, Al2O3 content does not play an important role in the 
reduction of pellets, which might be more related to the 
range studied. If this study fixed all the other parameters, 
and just varied the amount of Al2O3, we might have seen 
some deviation provoked by Al2O3. However, the current 
study put more focus on the understanding of the effect of 
different parameters for real samples, which indicates that 
 Al2O3 is not an important factor affecting the pellet quality 
compared with other factors studied. For the results shown 
in Fig. 10, each data point marked in the graphs represents 
an averaged value of two tests conducted with one pellet 
each, chosen randomly from the received package.
Swelling Index
Figure  11 summarizes the swelling index of iron ore pel-
let brands. As shown, brand C and brand A showed the 
highest and lowest swelling, respectively. Figure  12a sum-
marizes the relationship between the swelling index and 
reduction degree obtained after the swelling test. One of 
the main factors affecting the swelling behavior of pellets 
is the volume expansion induced by the transformation of 
hematite into lower valence oxides such as magnetite and 
wustite [32, 35]. Therefore, the reduction degree of pellet 
brands is an important factor to understand the swelling 
behavior of each pellet brand. According to the results, 
Fig. 6 Reduction disintegration index (RDI) of several brands of iron 
ore pellets
Fig. 7 Relationship between RDI+3.15 mm and reduction degree of pel-
lets after RDI tests
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
a higher reduction degree resulted in higher swelling, 
which is a harmful consequence for the strength of pel-
lets. To exemplify, Fig.  12b correlated the swelling index 
of pellets with the CCS of pellets after the swelling test. 
A higher swelling ratio deteriorated the pellet strength, 
which is not desirable for the blast furnace operation. 
The maintenance of pellet structure and strength is of 
great importance for the smooth operation of the reac-
tor. The porosity of pellets is also a contributing factor 
for the swelling. As the swelling is related to the volume 
expansion, a higher porosity is desired for a lower swell-
ing to properly accommodate the change from the volume 
expansion. In the case of a lower porosity, the changes 
might not find enough space inside the actual pellet, pro-
moting the formation of cracks and higher swelling. In 
addition to the effect of porosity, Fig.  13 summarizes the 
effect of T. Fe, Al2O3, MgO content, and basicity of pellet 
on the swelling behavior of pellets. The effect of T. Fe 
content seems to be complex, which might be determined 
by other factors. The starting idea is that a high T. Fe 
content is detrimental to the swelling of pellets as more 
 Fe2O3 is available to further reduce into lower valence 
oxides such as Fe3O4 and FeO, which would result in 
larger volume expansion. The aforementioned phenom-
enon is observed by the effect of Al2O3, which is a Fe2O3 
stabilizer. Higher levels of basicity and porosity improve 
the swelling of pellets by different reasons. Higher basic-
ity means that a significant amount of Fe2O3 is in the 
form of CaO⋅ Fe2O3, which reduces the volume expan-
sion caused by the reduction of single hematite, and the 
Fig. 8 Effect of different iron 
ore pellet parameters on RDI: a 
T. Fe content, b Al2O3 content, 
c MgO content, d basicity B2, 
and e porosity
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
difference in the reduction rate of CaO⋅ Fe2O3 and calcium 
silicates. In the case of porosity, higher levels might be 
favorable to accommodate the volume expansion caused 
by the reduction. For the results shown in Fig.  13, each 
data point marked in the graphs represents an averaged 
value of two tests conducted with one pellet each, chosen 
randomly from the received package.
Effect of Pellet Size on the Evaluated Properties 
of Iron Ore Pellets
To investigate the effect of pellet size on the previously 
analyzed properties, three different brands were selected: 
brands H, I and J. Iron ore pellets have a diverse range of 
size, mostly ranging from 8 to 16 mm [24]. Therefore, it 
is important to understand how the pellet size affects each 
property of the pellet, and to determine selection criteria 
of which size should be used in the actual operations. This 
study divided the pellets into four size groups: group 1 
from 8 to 9.5 mm, group 2 from 9.5 to 11 mm, group 3 
from 11 to 13 mm, and group 4 from 13 to 16 mm. All 
groups were analyzed in the identical experimental con-
ditions. Figure  14 summarizes the effect of pellet size on 
CCS, RDI+3.15 mm , reduction degree, and swelling. Based 
on the results, the trends were very clear. A bigger pellet 
improved the compressive strength and swelling behavior 
of pellets but deteriorated the RDI+3.15 mm and reducibil -
ity. The relationships presented for RDI +3.15 mm , reduc-
tion degree, and swelling are in agreement with previous 
researches [36, 37]. In case of CCS, some reported works 
provided an opposite relationship than the one found in 
our current investigation. Therefore, the same trend agrees 
with previous research reported by Iljana et al. [38] The 
possible reason for a lower compressive strength by 
increasing the pellet size is the presence of a dualistic 
structure represented by an outer shell composed by hema-
tite and a nucleus composed of magnetite, which could 
not be completely oxidized during the pelletizing process. 
However, through the chemical analysis of the received 
pellets, there was no significant presence of unoxidized 
magnetite in the core of studied pellets, which might elimi-
nate this reason to explain the effect of pellet size on CCS. 
In the case of RDI, reducibility and swelling, the explana-
tion comes from the same reason since all these properties 
are directly related to the reduction degree of the pellets. 
Smaller pellets are reduced more as the available oxygen is 
lower for the same flow rate of reducing gas. This behav -
ior formed a dense reduced shell, improving RDI +3.15 mm , 
and a higher volume expansion due to the transformation 
of Fe2O3 into Fe3O4, resulting in a higher swelling ratio. 
Therefore, based on the obtained results, an intermediate 
size of pellets (10 to 14 mm) might be the best choice for 
a smooth operation without compromising both strength 
and reduction behavior of pellets.
Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) Analysis
Several experiments were conducted using ten kinds of iron 
ore pellet brands, commonly used by the major steelmaking 
companies in the world, to first map the difference in their 
physicochemical properties, and then to understand how the 
distinct chemical composition and morphology—in terms of 
porosity level—would affect their physicochemical proper -
ties. This study represented the T. Fe (Fe2O3), Al2O3 and 
MgO content as an effect of chemical composition, and the 
basicity B2, which are the most decisive components of an 
iron ore pellet—over 98% according to Table  1. Numerous 
experiments were performed to carefully clarify the effect of 
each parameter on the physicochemical properties of pellets; 
this study attempted to derive an equation for each property, 
including CCS, RDI+3.15 mm, reduction degree, and swelling. 
To facilitate the interpretation of the experimental results, 
multiple linear regression (MLR) analysis was employed as 
an exploratory statistical tool to identify empirical relation-
ships between pellet characteristics (Fe2O3, Al2O3, MgO, 
basicity B2, and porosity) and the measured pellet properties 
(CCS, RDI, reduction degree, and swelling index). Because 
the investigated dataset consists of a limited number of com-
mercial pellet brands with inherently correlated variables, 
the resulting models should not be regarded as mechanistic 
or universal predictive equations. Instead, the MLR analysis 
was used to estimate the relative influence of the investigated 
parameters within the present dataset and to support the 
interpretation of the observed experimental trends. Online 
supplementary Table S1 summarizes the derived relations 
in between each property and major pellet compositional 
parameters, while more detailed statistical information is 
Fig. 9 Reduction degree of several brands of iron ore pellets
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
expressed in online supplementary Tables S2–S6. The men-
tioned tables can be found in the online supplementary file.
It is important to mention that in the case of swell-
ing, a higher value is not desirable, which indicates that 
the pellet swells more, and consequently is weaker after 
reduction. From online supplementary Table S1, the 
linear regression coefficient (R 2) was also reported for 
the derived equations. The authors do know that the R 2 
value is not high enough to provide strong reliability of 
the statistical models presented. However, although the 
linearity does not look high for some cases, especially 
that for CCS, it should be highlighted that this study con-
sidered the simultaneous effect of several parameters by 
using several commercial brands of pellets, which means 
that in case one parameter had its effect evaluated, other 
parameters could not be maintained constant, deterio-
rating the relationship of the analyzed variable with the 
correspondent property. Therefore, such an approach 
improved the current study using real samples, not modi-
fied samples, to understand the effect of a single param-
eter on the pellet properties, which was mostly reported in 
the literature [13– 17, 29]. To provide a more transparent 
and trustful model, it is for sure necessary to increase the 
amount of samples, but the authors doubt that the avail-
ability of commercial pellets would increase this list to 
a more significant amount. As mentioned, the received 
brands are the most used pellets in the major blast fur -
naces being operated worldwide. Therefore, owing to the 
limited sample amount and interdependence among vari-
ables, the results should be interpreted as empirical trends 
Fig. 10 Effect of different iron 
ore pellet parameters on reduc-
tion degree: a T. Fe content, b 
 Al2O3 content, c MgO content, 
d basicity B2, and e porosity
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
rather than independent mechanistic effects. It is neces-
sary to highlight that the analyses were not conducted 
for the degree of reduction by H2 gas as the reducing 
agent since the results were almost independent of pel-
lets parameters. The authors do know that pellets might 
behave differently inside the reactor when H2 is used, but 
this study is assessing the reduction behavior of pellets 
under the same conditions of hydrogen reduction, and 
based on the results, all the brands achieved a very high 
reduction degree independent of their chemical compo-
sition and porosity. As shown in Fig.  9, the reduction 
degree was achieved above 95% for all the pellets, which 
indicates that the reducing strength of H2 is more influ-
ential than the pellet quality. Furthermore, the current 
study aims to clarify the individual effect of each vari-
able on each property to give a better understanding of 
the governing factors for a selection criterion of pellets 
to be used especially in the blast furnace, which includes 
the optimal range of each variable. According to Table  1, 
the T. Fe content of all brands used in this study were 
quite similar since the manufacturing of iron ore pellets 
always considers the use of high-grade ores as raw materi-
als. However, high-grade ores will be depleted in coming 
years, thus it is possible to use lower-grade iron ore for 
the pelletizing process, which will provide a wider range 
of T. Fe content. Therefore, this study did not perform 
independent analysis by T. Fe content.
To facilitate comparison among the investigated vari-
ables, the standardized regression coefficients obtained 
from the MLR analysis were normalized and summarized 
in a heatmap chart, as shown in Fig.  15. Since the coeffi-
cients are dimensionless, their magnitude provides a direct 
indication of the relative influence of each parameter on 
the corresponding pellet property. It should be emphasized 
that these coefficients represent empirical trends within the 
investigated commercial pellet dataset and should not be 
interpreted as independent mechanistic effects. The values 
were normalized by the maximum absolute standardized 
coefficient observed among all models. Therefore, the chart 
illustrates the relative importance of each variable rather 
than the magnitude of the original regression coefficients.
Figure  15 summarizes the relative influence of the 
investigated pellet characteristics on CCS, RDI, reduc-
tion degree, and swelling index using normalized abso-
lute standardized regression coefficients obtained from 
the MLR analysis. The normalization was performed with 
respect to the maximum coefficient observed among all 
models, allowing direct comparison of the relative contri-
bution of each variable. The results indicate that MgO and 
basicity generally exhibited the strongest associations with 
Fig. 11 Swelling of several brands of iron ore pellets
Fig. 12 Relationship between swelling and a reduction degree of 
iron ore pellets after the swelling tests and b CCS of pellets after the 
swelling tests
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
pellet performance, while porosity and Al2O3 showed a 
comparatively smaller influence. In addition, the dominant 
variables varied depending on the evaluated property, sug-
gesting that no single pellet characteristic can adequately 
describe overall pellet quality. These observations sug-
gest that structural characteristics, represented by pores 
structure and mineral phase constitution, may play a more 
significant role than minor compositional variations in 
determining the overall performance of commercial pellets. 
However, because the regression models were developed 
from a limited set of commercial pellets with interdepend-
ent variables, these relationships should be interpreted as 
empirical trends rather than mechanistic or universally 
predictive effects.
The predictive capability of the empirical MLR models 
was evaluated by comparing the measured experimental 
values with those calculated from the regression equations, 
as shown in Fig.  16. In general, the calculated values fol-
lowed the observed experimental trends, indicating that the 
selected compositional and structural parameters capture a 
substantial portion of the variability among the investigated 
pellet brands. Nevertheless, owing to the limited number 
of commercial samples and the interdependence among 
variables, the models should be interpreted as exploratory 
statistical tools rather than universally applicable predictive 
equations. The purpose of this comparison is not to establish 
a predictive design tool, but rather to assess the consistency 
of the empirical relationships identified in the present study.
Fig. 13 Effect of different iron 
ore pellet parameters on swell-
ing: a T. Fe content, b Al2O3 
content, c MgO content, d 
basicity B2, and e porosity
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
Relative Influence of Iron Ore Pellets Parameters 
on Their Physicochemical Properties
According to the trend observed in this study regarding 
the effect of basicity on the physicochemical properties of 
iron ore pellets, an intermediate level of basicity might be 
a proper option to maintain all properties at acceptable lev -
els. Higher basicity leads to good reducibility and swelling, 
while intermediate levels of B 2 improved the compressive 
strength and reduction disintegration index. A similar find-
ing was reported by Umadevi et al. [13], which suggested an 
optimal basicity level between 0.3 and 0.4 to satisfy all the 
measured properties such as CCS, TI, and RDI. Therefore, 
after deep investigation on the effect of basicity level on pel-
let performance, B2 basicity around 1.0 might be the optimal 
choice for a better optimization of the pellet quality.
In the case of Al2O3 content, its individual effect is still 
unknown, and there is lack of data regarding this issue, which 
might be related to the most use of high-grade iron ores as 
raw materials for the pelletizing process, excluding high 
 Al2O3 ores. Therefore, the utilization of such iron ores was 
Fig. 14 Effect of iron ore pellet size on its performance: a CCS, b RDI+3.15 mm, c reduction degree, and d swelling
Fig. 15 Heatmap of normalized absolute standardized regression 
coefficients (|β|) obtained from the MLR analysis, illustrating the rela-
tive influence of pellet characteristics (Fe2O3, Al2O3, MgO, B 2, and 
porosity) on CCS, RDI, reduction degree, and swelling behavior. 
Darker colors indicate stronger relative influence
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
not studied in the manufacturing of pellets. However, several 
investigations are being conducted for the use of high-Al2O3 
ore for the sintering process [34, 39], but the study for the pel-
letizing process is still ongoing. Agrawal et al. [17] analyzed 
the effect of Al2O3 on the CCS and RDI of pellets, point-
ing out that the increase in Al2O3 content deteriorates both 
properties. They considered the Al2O3 content in between 
1.7 and 2.7 wt%, which is much higher than the common 
 Al2O3 content being used in current pelletizing processes. 
Among the ten brands used in this study, only one (brand C) 
showed an Al2O3 content over 1 wt%. The results obtained 
from Agrawal et al. [17] might be originated from the iron 
ore source used for the pelletizing process, which required the 
change in the pelletizing conditions. A similar investigation 
was also conducted by Umadevi et al. [40], which studied 
two different Al2O3-containing ores as raw materials for pel-
letizing with contents above 2 wt%. Through the results, the 
final quality of the pellet seems the same. Samples constituted 
of majorly hematite, followed by porosity and silicate melt, 
similar values of CCS and RDI. Zhang et al. [41] studied the 
effect of aluminum oxide on the CCS of pellets with Al2O3 
contents ranging from 1 to 3.5 wt%. According to his find-
ings, CCS was improved from 1 to 1.5 wt%, followed by a 
deterioration. The major reason for the early improvement 
is that when Al2O3 is present in small levels, it will enter the 
silicate system to form a compound (2FeO·2Al 2O3·5SiO2), 
which will reduce the amount of iron combined with SiO2 
that hinders the oxidation of Fe3O4 into Fe2O3, improving 
Fig. 16 Comparison between 
experimentally measured and 
MLR-calculated values for the 
investigated pellet properties: 
a CCS, b RDI +3.15 mm by 
CO, c RDI +3.15 mm by H2, 
d reduction degree by CO and 
e swelling. The coefficient of 
determination (R2) is provided 
for reference. The models are 
intended to describe empirical 
trends within the investigated 
commercial pellet dataset rather 
than to provide universal predic-
tive equations
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
the crystallinity of Fe2O3. Therefore, the individual effect of 
 Al2O3 is still unclear, and the results obtained in this study 
might be helpful to understand the Al2O3 behavior in the 
pellets. This study recommends, based on the experimental 
results, an Al2O3 content below 1 wt% for the pellets to be 
abundantly charged into the reduction furnaces. However, if 
other parameters are modified to compensate for the increase 
in Al2O3 content with porosity or basicity level, then addi -
tional investigation should be conducted to adjust the optimal 
parameters for each Al2O3 content. While such research is not 
provided, levels below 1 wt% might be applied.
As is similar to the Al2O3 content, few studies were done 
to clarify the effect of MgO content on the pellet quality. 
However, MgO is known for its high melting point, mostly 
used as refractory or slagging material. In particular, MgO 
behavior in the sintering process is widely known to stabi-
lize the MgO⋅Fe2O3 phase, which has lower reducibility than 
other phases containing Fe2O3, deteriorating RDI and swell-
ing due to the similar reason. Therefore, the role of MgO in 
iron ores in the high temperature processes, either sinter -
ing or pelletizing, is well-known. A similar conclusion was 
obtained in this study, that is, the increase in MgO content 
deteriorated all analyzed properties, which agrees with some 
previous studies [13, 29]. Such conclusions confirm that a 
low MgO content of around 0.2 wt% is preferable for the 
pellets to be highly used in the reduction furnaces. Although 
one successful case of implementing high-MgO pellets in 
blast furnace is known [42], several previous studies corrobo-
rate our findings, that the high presence of MgO deteriorates 
some of the physicochemical properties of pellets. Various 
reasons could be mentioned, for example, the pelletizing pro-
cess adopted by different companies when treating high-MgO 
ores, which is a valuable step and determines the final quality 
of the pellet in terms of complete firing, porosity level, etc.
As is similar to the effect of basicity, the porosity also has 
dual effects on the properties of iron ore pellets. An increase in 
porosity leads to loose structure, and deteriorates the mechani-
cal strength [13], while promoting the reduction. Simultane-
ously, this loose structure provides enough space to accommo-
date any volume expansion that occurred from the reduction 
process. Therefore, intermediate levels of porosity are also 
preferred to maintain all the investigated properties at accept-
able levels. This study investigated the range of porosity from 
around 15 to 25%, which results in selecting a porosity level 
at about 20% to keep the pellet quality in a safe zone for the 
measured properties.
Conclusions
Several analyses were performed in this study to under -
stand the effect of some pellet parameters on the phys-
icochemical properties of iron ore pellets such as CCS, 
RDI+3.15 mm , reducibility, and swelling ratio. The major 
parameters investigated in this study were T. Fe content, 
basicity level, Al2O3 content, MgO content, and porosity 
level. From the findings, the following conclusions were 
obtained.
(1) The pellet parameters distinctly affect several prop-
erties investigated in this study. The pellets might 
be selected on the basis of their chemical composi-
tion and mechanical strength, mostly measured by 
CCS. Based on these criteria, brand B pellet might 
be considered the first option for steelmaking com-
panies. However, careful investigation indicated that 
the pellet was analyzed to have the lowest reducibility 
and highest swelling, which means that the selection 
cannot be only based on chemical composition and 
mechanical strength. The pellet behavior in the blast 
furnace must be considered an important factor to 
determine what kind of raw materials should be used.
(2) Multiple linear regression (MLR) analysis was used as 
an exploratory statistical approach to estimate the rela-
tive influence of pellet characteristics within the inves-
tigated commercial dataset. The equations correlated 
four kinds of properties such as CCS, RDI, reducibility, 
and swelling with several variables from the pellets, 
including Fe2O3, Al2O3 and MgO content, basicity B2, 
and porosity.
(3) 
(4) Considering the charge of iron ore pellets into different 
reduction furnaces, within the investigated commercial 
pellet dataset, favorable performance was generally asso-
ciated with lower MgO content, moderate basicity, and 
porosity near 20%. These observations should be regarded 
as empirical trends rather than universal design criteria.
CCS: 0.10 × /bracketleft.s1Fe2O 3
/bracketright.s1− 0.35× B2 + 0.47× /bracketleft.s1Al2O 3
/bracketright.s1
− 0.55× /bracketleft.s1MgO /bracketright.s1− 0.09× porosity− 4.66
RDI_CO: 1.35 ×[ Fe2O 3]−2.54
× B2 + 4.43×[ Al2O 3]− 8.29
×[ MgO ]− 0.13× porosity− 28.69
RDI_H 2∶ 2.26×[ Fe2O 3]− 8.31× B2 + 2.20
×[ Al2O 3]− 9.84×[ MgO ]− 0.37× porosity− 108.37
Reduction degree_CO: 0.08 ×[ Fe2O 3]+ 12.57× B2
+ 3.81×[ Al2O 3]+ 3.87×[ MgO ]+ 0.35× porosity+ 44.77
Swelling∶ 1.83×[ Fe2O 3]−5.70 × B2
+ 19.86×[ Al2O 3]−0.30 ×[ MgO]
− 0.37× porosity− 152.50
 Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy
(5) Larger pellets improved the compressive strength 
and swelling, while smaller pellets enhanced the 
RDI+3.15 mm and reducibility. Therefore, intermediate 
size of pellets ranging from 9.5 to 12 mm is desired to 
maintain their performance in the reactors.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40831- 026- 01608-7.
Conflict of Interest On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author 
states that there is no conflict of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, 
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and repro-
duction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit 
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative 
Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material 
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party 
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons 
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If 
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and 
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds 
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from 
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
 1. International Energy Agency (2020) Iron and Steel Technology 
Roadmap. https:// www. iea. org/ repor ts/ iron- and- steel- techn ology- 
roadm ap. Accessed 10 Dec 2025
 2. Reuters (2024) New green steel firms could reap rewards as EU 
carbon tariffs loom. https:// www. reute rs. com/ marke ts/ commo 
dities/ new- green- steel- firms- could- reap- rewar ds- eu- carbon- tarif 
fs- loom- 2024- 11- 08/. Accessed 10 Dec 2025
 3. Sohn HY (2020) Energy consumption and CO2 emissions in 
ironmaking and development of a novel flash technology. Metals 
10(1):54. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ met10 010054
 4. Tomas da Rocha L, Cho SK, Kim SW, Chung BJ, Jung SM (2024) 
Development of a low-carbon sintering process technology and its 
application to a pilot-scale sintering testing. ISIJ Int 64(13):1871–
1880. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. ISIJI NT- 2024- 239
 5. Lu L, Ishiyama O (2015) Iron ore sintering. Iron ore. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, pp 395–433
 6. Agrawal A (2019) Blast furnace performance under varying pellet 
proportion. Trans Indian Inst Met 72:777–787. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1007/ s12666- 018- 1530-6
 7. Lv W, Sun Z, Su Z (2019) Life cycle energy consumption and 
greenhouse gas emissions of iron pelletizing process in China: 
a case study. J Clean Prod 233:1314–1321. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/j. jclep ro. 2019. 06. 180
 8. Hooey L, Riesbeck J, Wikström JO, Björkman B (2014) Role of 
ferrous raw materials in the energy efficiency of integrated steel-
making. ISIJ Int 54(3):596–604. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern 
ation al. 54. 596
 9. Kim DH, Yoo BS, Tomas da Rocha L, Cho SK, Kim SJ, Jung 
SM (2024) Development of a low-carbon sintering process 
using carbon composite agglomerates and hydrogen-rich 
fuel. J Sustain Metall 10:1895–1904. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s40831- 024- 00921-3
 10. Pal J, Ghorai S, Ammasi A, Hota SK, Koranne VM, Venugopalan 
T (2017) Improving reducibility of iron ore pellets by optimization 
of physical parameters. J Min Metall Sect B-Metall 53(1):37–46. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 2298/ JMMB1 51206 014P
 11. Hotta H, Yamaoka Y (1985) Assimilation of iron ore during sin-
tering and its influence on sinter quality. Trans Iron Steel Inst Jpn 
25(4):294–301. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al1966. 25. 294
 12. Iljana M, Kemppainen A, Paananen T, Mattila O, Heikkinen EP, 
Fabritius T (2016) Evaluating the reduction-softening behav -
iour of blast furnace burden with an advanced test. ISIJ Int 
56(10):1705–1714. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. ISIJI 
NT- 2016- 117
 13. Umadevi T, Kumar P, Lobo NF, Prabhu M, Mahapatra PC, Ranjan 
M (2011) Influence of pellet basicity (CaO/SiO2) on iron ore pellet 
properties and microstructure. ISIJ Int 51(1):14–20. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. 51. 14
 14. Dwarapudi S, Ghosh TK, Shankar A, Tathavadkar V, Bhattacha-
rgjee D, Venugopal R (2011) Effect of pellet basicity and MgO 
content on the quality and microstructure of hematite pellets. Int 
J Miner Process 99:43–53. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. minpro. 2011. 
03. 004
 15. Shen F, Gao Q, Jiang X, Wei G, Zheng H (2014) Effect of mag-
nesia on the compressive strength of pellets. Int J Miner Metall 
Mater 21(5):431–437. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12613- 014- 0926-
 16. Umadevi T, Kumar A, Karthik P, Srinidhi R, Manjini S (2018) 
Characterisation studies on swelling behaviour of iron ore pellets. 
Ironmak Steelmak 45(2):157–165. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 03019 
233. 2016. 12500 43
 17. Agrawal A, Gavel DJ, Shaik MB, Dwarapudi S, Paul I (2021) 
Optimum pellet basicity desirable for blast furnace operation. 
J Inst Eng India Ser D 102:87–93. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s40033- 021- 00258-1
 18. JIS M 8213:1995 Iron ores—method for determination of acid 
soluble iron (II) content. JIS
 19. ISO 11535:2006 Iron ores—determination of various elements—
inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometric 
method. ISO
 20. Fernandez-Gonzalez D, Ruiz-Bustinza I, Mochon J, Gonzalez-
Gasca C, Verdeja LF (2017) Iron ore sintering: process. Miner 
Process Extr Metall Rev 38(4):254–264. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 
08827 508. 2017. 12881 15
 21. ISO 4700:2015: Iron ore pellets for blast furnace and direct reduc-
tion feedstocks—determination of the crushing strength. ISO: 
Geneva, Switzerland, 2015, pp 1–5
 22. ISO 4696-2:2006: Iron ores for blast furnace feedstocks—deter -
mination of low-temperature reduction-disintegration indices by 
static method—part 2: Reduction with CO and N2. ISO: Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2006, pp 1–10
 23. JIS M 8713:2009: Iron ores—Determination of reducibility by 
the final degree of reduction index. Japanese Industrial Standards, 
Tokyo, 2009
 24. Meyer K (1980) Pelletizing of iron ores. Springer, Heidelberg
 25. Chai Y, Fan Y, Gao X, Luo G, Wang Y, An S, Liu J (2022) Effect 
of basicity on the reduction swelling performance of pellets pre-
pared from Bayan Obo iron ore concentrate based on microscopic 
characterization. Crystals 12(10):1399. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ 
cryst 12101 399
 26. Kumar S, Ravi B, Sivrikaya O, Nanda RK (2019) The study 
of pelletizing of mixed hematite and magnetite ores. Sci Sinter 
51(1):27–38. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2298/ SOS19 01027K
 27. Yang F (2025) Compressive strength and metallurgical properties 
of pellets with added oolitic hematite. Metals 15(3):303. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 3390/ met15 030303
Journal of Sustainable Metallurgy 
 28. Meraj M, Pramanik S, Pal J (2016) Role of MgO and its different 
minerals on properties of iron ore pellet. Trans Indian Inst Met 
69:1141–1153. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12666- 015- 0676-8
 29. Chun TJ, Mu GT, Meng QM, Long HM, Wang P, Bi CG (2019) 
Preparation of MgO added iron ore pellets and effects on a pilot 
scale blast furnace operation. J Min Metall Sect B-Metall 55:167–
175. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2298/ JMMB1 81129 015C
 30. Mizutani M, Nishimura T, Orimoto T, Higuchi K, Nomura S, 
Saito K, Kasai E (2017) Influence of reducing gas composition 
on disintegration behavior of iron ore agglomerates. ISIJ Int 
57:1499–1508. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. ISIJI 
NT- 2017- 074
 31. Boechat FO, Tomas da Rocha L, de Carvalho RM, Jung SM, 
Tavares LM (2018) Amenability of reduced iron ore pellets to 
mechanical degradation. ISIJ Int 58:1028–1033. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. ISIJI NT- 2017- 734
 32. Purohit S, Pownceby MI, Guiraud A (2025) Sticking and 
swelling of iron ore pellets: mechanisms and controlling fac-
tors. J Sustain Metall 11:67–87. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s40831- 024- 01000-3
 33. Guo Y, Liu K, Chen F, Wang S, Zheng F, Yang L, Liu Y (2021) 
Effect of basicity on the reduction swelling behavior and mech-
anism of limestone fluxed iron ore pellets. Powder Technol 
393:291–300. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. powtec. 2021. 07. 057
 34. Kim SJ, Tomas da Rocha L, Kim SW, Jung SM (2025) Effect 
of mill-scale and calcined dolomite on high Al2O3 sinter and its 
phase development. Metall Mater Trans B 56:4472–4483. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11663- 025- 03677-7
 35. Elsherbiny AA, Omran M, Qiu D, Xiong Y, Galal AM, Saxen H, 
Yu Y (2025) Swelling behavior and stress analysis of hematite 
pellets: predicting failure through distortion energy criteria. Pow-
der Technol 457:120893. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. powtec. 2025. 
120893
 36. Dwarapudi S, Umadevi T, Rao SM, Ranjan M (2008) Influence 
of pellet size on quality and microstructure of iron ore pellets. 
ISIJ Int 48:768–776. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2355/ isiji ntern ation al. 
48. 768
 37. Umadevi T, Kumar P, Lobo NF, Mahapatra PC, Prabhu M, Ran-
jan M (2009) Effect of iron ore pellet size on its properties and 
microstructure. Steel Res Int 80:709–716. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2374/ 
SRI08 SP169
 38. Iljana M, Paananen T, Mattila O, Kondrakov M, Fabritius T 
(2022) Effect on iron ore pellet size on metallurgical properties. 
Metals 12:302. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ met12 020302
 39. Hariswijaya D, Tomas da Rocha L, Chiwandika EK, Jung SM 
(2022) Effect of alumina on calcium ferrites development in the 
goethite ore sinters. J Sustain Metall 8:257–273. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s40831- 021- 00477-6
 40. Umadevi T, Sah R (2023) Effect of olivine as MgO-bearing flux on 
low- and high-alumina iron ore pellets. J Min Metall Sect B-Metall 
59:455–464. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2298/ JMMB2 30610 039U
 41. Zhang J, Wang Z, Xing X, Liu Z (2014) Effect of aluminum oxide 
on the compressive strength of pellets. Int J Miner Metall Mater 
21:339–344. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s12613- 014- 0914-9
 42. Iljana M, Heikkinen EP, Fabritius T (2021) Estimation of iron ore 
pellet softening in a blast furnace with computational thermody -
namics. Metals 11:1515. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ met11 101515
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.