Correction on: Liepina-Leimane I, Jurgensone I, Barda I, Kokorite I and Aigars J (2026) Diverging temporal trends and environmental drivers of dominant cyanobacteria in the Gulf of Riga, 1976-2024. Front. Mar. Sci. 12:1713992. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2025.1713992 There was a mistake in Figure 7 as published. The two bottom rows of the heatmap incorrectly display another set of summer correlation values (DIN/DIP at a specific layer in stations 165, 101A, 119, 121) instead of the intended winter DIN and DIP values. This occurred due to a data mix-up during plot processing in R. The corrected Figure 7 appears below.The original version of this article has been updated.The Figure 5 and Figure 6 were in the wrong order in the PDF and HTML version of this paper (https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/marine-science/articles/10.3389/fmars.2025.1713992/full). This error was flagged by the authors during the proof stage but was not resolved. Note that the captions are in a correct order. The order has now been corrected.The original version of this article has been updated.Reminder: Figures, tables, and images will be published under a Creative Commons CC-BY license and permission must be obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including re-published/adapted/modified/partial figures and images from the internet). It is the responsibility of the authors to acquire the licenses, to follow any citation instructions requested by third-party rights holders, and cover any supplementary charges.Adding/removing text Text insertion in the Introduction. In the second-to-last paragraph of the Introduction, the phrase "odd formatting" has been inserted to replace the correct term "runoff" into the main text: "Moreover, seasonal shifts in riverine odd formating have been observed in recent decades (Käyhkö et al., 2015), altering timing and magnitude of nutrient inflow to coastal areas. This redistribution of river runoff has altered salinity, stratification, and turbidity (Aigars et al., 2024). Consequently, the combined effect on cyanobacterial bloom intensity and species composition in the Gulf of Riga remains unresolved.". This was a comment by authors during proof stage and was meant regarding formatting. It should not have been included by production team in the main text.A correction has been made to the section [Introduction, Paragraph 6, line 180 : "Moreover, seasonal shifts in riverine runoff have been observed in recent decades (Käyhkö et al., 2015), altering timing and magnitude of nutrient inflow to coastal areas. This redistribution of river runoff has altered salinity, stratification, and turbidity (Aigars et al., 2024).Consequently, the combined effect on cyanobacterial bloom intensity and species composition in the Gulf of Riga remains unresolved. [insert corrected paragraph]"The original version of this article has been updated.contact the journal's editorial office.