A Novel Integrated Approach for the Assessment of Coastal Eutrophication Using Advanced Statistical Tools and GIS 
 
 
 
 
 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples are advised the Griffith Research Online collection may contain images, voices and names of people who are deceased. Some language and materials may be considered inappropriate, reflecting the views of the period in which it was produced. While this language has been retained to preserve historical context, these are not the views of Griffith University. 
Request item review: https://www.griffith.edu.au/library/about/culturally-respectful#item-review. Log In Communities & Collections All of GRO More Information Contact Us Home Griffith Research Online Journal articles A Novel Integrated Approach for the Assessment of Coastal Eutrophication Using Advanced Statistical Tools and GIS 
 Metadata only A Novel Integrated Approach for the Assessment of Coastal Eutrophication Using Advanced Statistical Tools and GIS 
 No Thumbnail Available File version Author(s) Ngadi, Hamza Layachi, Mostafa Azizi, Ghizlane Yousfi, Yassine EL Gueddari, Hicham Loukili, Hamza Rahhou, Abderrahmane Chahban, Mohamed Kader, Shuraik Bertone, Edoardo Jaufer, Lizny Meraj, Gowhar Tariq, Aqil Almazroui, Mansour Moumen, Abdelmajid Griffith University Author(s) Kader, Shuraik Bertone, Edoardo Primary Supervisor Other Supervisors Editor(s) Date 2026 Size File type(s) Location License Abstract The eutrophication of coastal waters is a primary environmental concern worldwide, with severe implications for marine biodiversity and ecosystem services. Effective monitoring and assessment of eutrophication are crucial for the sustainable management of coastal zones. However, traditional methods often fail in terms of accuracy and scalability. This study introduces a novel integrated methodology for evaluating eutrophication by combining statistical modeling, trophic indices, and Geographic Information System (GIS) tools. This methodology was applied over 12 months to assess the eutrophication status of Saïdia Bay, Morocco, a region of significant ecological and economic importance. Monthly water samples were collected from eight stations, and 13 water quality parameters were measured, including chlorophyll a, nutrients, and dissolved oxygen. Statistical techniques such as Principal Component Analysis, Cluster Analysis), and Factor Analysis were employed to identify the primary water quality parameters and categorize the stations based on pollution levels. Trophic indices, including the Eutrophication Index (EI), Carlson Trophic State Index (TSI), and Trophic Index (TRIX), were calculated and visualized using GIS-based modeling. The findings revealed that Saïdia Bay is currently in “Good” ecological condition according to the EI, with both Carlson TSI (< 47) and TRIX (2–4) classifying it as “Oligotrophic,” with seasonal variations reflecting localized mesotrophic conditions in autumn. This integrated approach represents a significant advancement in coastal water quality monitoring, provides a robust framework for assessing eutrophication, and supports targeted management strategies. This methodology is also transferable, offering a scalable model for eutrophication assessments in coastal regions worldwide. 
 Show more Journal Title Water, Air, & Soil Pollution 
 Conference Title Book Title Edition Volume 237 
 Issue 3 
 Thesis Type Degree Program School Publisher link DOI 10.1007/s11270-025-08845-8 Patent number Funder(s) Grant identifier(s) Rights Statement Rights Statement Item Access Status Note Access the data Related item(s) Subject Environmental Management 
 Earth Sciences 
 Economics 
 Environmental Sciences 
 Geoinformatics 
 Marine and estuarine ecology (incl. marine ichthyology) 
 Biological oceanography 
 Oceanography 
 Environmental assessment and monitoring 
 Persistent link to this record https://hdl.handle.net/10072/440553 Citation Ngadi, H; Layachi, M; Azizi, G; Yousfi, YEL; Gueddari, H; Loukili, H; Rahhou, A; Chahban, M; Kader, S; Bertone, E; Jaufer, L; Meraj, G; Tariq, A; Almazroui, M; Moumen, A, A Novel Integrated Approach for the Assessment of Coastal Eutrophication Using Advanced Statistical Tools and GIS, Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, 2026, 237 (3), pp. 163 
 Collections Journal articles Full item page Privacy Statement Copyright matters CRICOS Provider - 00233E TEQSA: PRV12076 Gold Coast Logan Brisbane - Queensland, Australia First Peoples of Australia