This study used an integrated method that included geographic information system (GIS), remote sensing, and analytical hierarchy process (AHP) approaches to examine flood susceptibility in the Panzara River basin of Maharashtra, India. Nine flood-conditioning parameters were used in the present study such as rainfall, land elevation, slope, land use/land cover (LULC), drainage density, normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), geomorphology, topographic wetness index (TWI) and lineament density. The AHP technique was used to estimate each parameter’s relative weight through a systematic and transparent process. Finally, weighted overlay analysis resulted in the flood susceptibility zonation (FSZ) map, which divided the study area into 5 susceptibility classes varying from very low to very high. The moderate susceptibility zone extended across 31.21% of the area, while the low, very low, high and very high classes covered 25.77%, 12.25%, 22.31% and 8.43% area, respectively. The flood-prone areas with high and very high-risk levels were situated primarily in floodplains and alluvial plains and near major stream channels because these areas experience increased flood danger from their low land elevation, gentle slopes, dense drainage networks and heavy rainfall. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve revealed the value of area under the curve (AUC) as 0.793, which indicated an excellent performance of the AHP modelling and validated the generated flood susceptibility map. The study showed that integration of AHP with remote sensing and GIS created an efficient and affordable system for flood risk evaluation. The flood susceptibility map serves as an essential tool to help with flood risk management and land-use planning and disaster preparedness and sustainable development projects in the Panzara River basin. The methodology developed in this study enables other monsoon-affected and flood-prone basins worldwide to enhance their disaster resilience while reducing damage from floods.