Homogenization of diatom assemblages is driven by eutrophication in tropical reservoirs 
 
 
 
 
 Pular para o conteúdo principal
 Comunidades & Coleções Tudo no Repositório Estatísticas Português do Brasil English Español Entrar Entrar pela Central de Acessos Entrar com o ORCID Início Produção acadêmica e científica _Coleta_ Artigos Homogenization of diatom assemblages is driven by eutrophication in tropical reservoirs Homogenization of diatom assemblages is driven by eutrophication in tropical reservoirs Carregando... Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117778 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117778 Data 2021-11-01 Autores Zorzal-Almeida, Stéfano Bartozek, Elaine C. Rodrigues Bicudo, Denise C. Orientador Coorientador Pós-graduação Curso de graduação Título da Revista ISSN da Revista Título de Volume Editor Elsevier Tipo Artigo Direito de acesso Acesso aberto Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117778 Fontes externas http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2021.117778 Resumo Eutrophication is one of the most widespread causes of biotic homogenization in freshwater ecosystems. Biotic homogenization can be characterized as reductions in local diversity (alpha) and occupation of available niches by more generalist species. Beta diversity is expected to decrease in more homogeneous communities, however, there is no consensus on how it responds to eutrophication. We used a space-for-time approach to analyze the process of biotic homogenization on diatom assemblages in response to eutrophication in tropical reservoirs ranging from oligotrophic to hypereutrophic conditions. Diatom assemblages were analyzed in phytoplankton and surface sediment from 12 reservoirs with different trophic levels. We calculated total beta diversity and turnover and nestedness components and used regressions to analyze their relationships with productivity differences (without distance effects). Total beta diversity had a positive influence of the trophic gradient, whereas turnover was not related to eutrophication. However, we found that eutrophication and lower species richness (alpha diversity) led to increasing rates of the nestedness component. We also observed that the homogenization process was not characterized by invasion of new species, but, on the contrary, by filtering nutrient-rich tolerant species also present in oligo-mesotrophic reservoirs and able to occupy available niches in the eutrophic reservoirs. These findings (increase in nestedness, decrease in alpha diversity, and development of tolerant species) suggest that biotic homogenization is leading to a simplification of diatom assemblages in tropical reservoirs, making assemblages from eutrophic and hypereutrophic reservoirs a subset of assemblages from oligotrophic and mesotrophic ones. Mostrar mais Descrição Palavras-chave Beta diversity Biodiversity Nestedness Trophic gradient Idioma Inglês Citação Environmental Pollution, v. 288. URI http://hdl.handle.net/11449/221980 Itens relacionados Financiadores Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo (FAPESP) Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) Coleções Artigos Unidades Departamentos Cursos de graduação Programas de pós-graduação Estatísticas de acesso
 Página do item completo Outras formas de acesso doi Dimensions Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" Configurações de cookies Configurações de acessibilidade Política de privacidade Sobre o Repositório Institucional UNESP Perguntas frequentes (FAQ) Enviar uma sugestão