Context—Unfortunately, concrete and reinforced concrete structures face numerous adversaries in their environments. Therefore, taking necessary preventive measures to extend the service life of these structures exposed to such environments is vital. For example, such structures are frequently exposed to environments containing sulfates or chlorides, as well as freeze-thaw cycles and/or wetting-drying cycles. Due to its structure, concrete is potentially susceptible to damage from environmental influences. As a result, concrete, which suffers a loss of strength and structural integrity, can lose its lifespan sooner than expected. One of the processes that causes concrete to lose its strength and structural integrity over time is alkali-silica reaction (ASR). Alkali-silica reaction is a chemical interaction that occurs between reactive silica in the aggregate and alkalis in the pore water of the concrete. The alkali-silica gel formed as a result of this interaction absorbs the water in the environment, swells, and causes the concrete to expand over time and eventually crack. The primary condition for ASR is the presence of a humid environment. Unfortunately, concrete and reinforced concrete are often exposed to water in their environments. Therefore, concrete and reinforced concrete structures are at risk in this respect. ASR is a very slow process, and it can take years for concrete to lose its functionality and load-bearing capacity due to ASR alone. However, since ASR is a frequently encountered damage process, its prevention has gained importance in recent years. For this purpose, various preventive methods have been tried to date, one of which is the use of pozzolanic materials. Objective—This study aims to comparatively evaluate the effectiveness of silica fume and metakaolin in suppressing alkali-silica reactivity in a mortar-scale study using an alkali-reactive aggregate.Method—For this purpose, mixtures were produced by substituting silica fume and metakaolin separately with cement at 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% by weight, and the results obtained were evaluated comparatively. The comparison was carried out considering a reference mixture without silica fume and metakaolin. Alkali-silica measurements were performed in accordance with ASTM C1260 standard.Results—In general, the test results confirmed that silica fume and metakaolin significantly reduce, or even prevent, ASR-induced expansion. The results showed that a 5% substitution ratio was insufficient to suppress alkali-silica-induced expansion for both mineral additives, whereas a 10% substitution ratio reduced alkali-silica-induced expansion below the 0.10% limit specified as the innocuous limit in the relevant standard ASTM C1260. Furthermore, the results clearly show that the reduction in expansion becomes more pronounced as the substitution ratio increases.Conclusion—In conclusion, considering the conditions under which the experimental study was conducted and the characteristics of the