Assessment of coastal groundwater quality, pollution sources, and fitness-for-purpose in Tien Giang province of the Vietnamese Mekong Delta | Environmental Systems Research | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SpringerOpen journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environmental Systems Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assessment of coastal groundwater quality, pollution sources, and fitness-for-purpose in Tien Giang province of the Vietnamese Mekong Delta 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 22 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environmental Systems Research 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assessment of coastal groundwater quality, pollution sources, and fitness-for-purpose in Tien Giang province of the Vietnamese Mekong Delta
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nguyen Thanh Giao  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5916-4710 1 , Huynh Thi Hong Nhien  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-4902-3986 1 , Nguyen Hieu Nghia  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0009-9710-4343 2 , 3 & … Pumis Thuptimdang  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5473-0218 4 , 5   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract This study evaluates the current status of groundwater quality and its suitability for domestic, irrigation, and industrial applications within Tien Giang province, Vietnam, located in the Mekong Delta area. Groundwater samples were collected from 31 locations during March, June, and September in 2020 and 2022, and analyzed for key physico-chemical and microbial parameters. Water quality analysis was conducted by direct comparison with national water quality standards (QCVN 09-MT:2015/BTNMT for groundwater quality; QCVN 01–1:2018/BYT for domestic water quality) and statistical analysis using the Integrated Water Quality Index (IWQI), Principal Component Analysis (PCA), and Absolute Principal Component Score-Multiple Linear Regression (APCS-MLR). Results revealed that while most parameters met general groundwater standards according to QCVN 09-MT:2015/BTNMT, and IWQI classified samples as good and excellent, indicating suitability for irrigation. However, a pollution risk was observed for heavy metal concentrations, which suggests water treatment before consumption. Due to stricter domestic water regulations according to QCVN 01–1:2018/BYT, many groundwater samples were found unsuitable for consumption: Fe (65.6% of total samples) and Cl − (20.4%) were problematic in 2020 while As (29.0%), Fe (22.6%), and Mn (14.0%) exceeded the limits in 2022. For industrial use, 12.9–22.6% of the locations showed corrosion potential according to pH and Cl − levels. Spatial analysis showed poorer groundwater quality in central and eastern regions. PCA/APCS-MLR identified mineralization/ion exchange and agricultural impacts as the primary determinants for the groundwater quality. These findings highlight the need for targeted groundwater treatment and management in Tien Giang to ensure the safety for both domestic and industrial water supply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Groundwater quality assessment using modified water quality index and associated human health risks in coastal regions of Vietnamese Mekong Delta
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 15 October 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A novel framework for groundwater quality evaluation in industrial zone using unsupervised machine learning methods
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 14 February 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Groundwater quality assessment for drinking purposes: a case study in the Mekong Delta, Vietnam
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 16 March 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Soil and Water Protection 
 
 
 
 Water Industry and Water Technology 
 
 
 
 Water Policy 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeology 
 
 
 
 Water Quality and Water Pollution 
 
 
 
 Water 
 
 
 
 Groundwater Quality Assessment and Management Strategies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements This research work was partially supported by Chiang Mai University. Funding No funding was received to assist with the preparation of this manuscript. Author information Authors and Affiliations College of Environment and Natural Resources, Can Tho University, Can Tho, 900000, Vietnam Nguyen Thanh Giao & Huynh Thi Hong Nhien Department of Agriculture and Environment, Cao Lãnh, Dong Thap Province, Vietnam Nguyen Hieu Nghia Economic Office of Hoi Cu Commune, Cao Lãnh, Dong Thap Province, Vietnam Nguyen Hieu Nghia Environmental Science Research Center, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand Pumis Thuptimdang Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 50200, Thailand Pumis Thuptimdang Authors Nguyen Thanh Giao View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Huynh Thi Hong Nhien View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Nguyen Hieu Nghia View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Pumis Thuptimdang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Pumis Thuptimdang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Supplementary Material 1. (download DOCX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Giao, N.T., Nhien, H.T.H., Nghia, N.H. et al. Assessment of coastal groundwater quality, pollution sources, and fitness-for-purpose in Tien Giang province of the Vietnamese Mekong Delta.
 Environ Syst Res (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40068-026-00498-8 Download citation Received : 14 July 2026 Accepted : 12 September 2026 Published : 22 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s40068-026-00498-8 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords APCS-MLR Arsenic contamination Groundwater monitoring IWQI Saltwater intrusion 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Pumis Thuptimdang 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature