Malpelo Island is the emergent summit of the Malpelo Ridge, a NE-SW-trending oceanic volcanic ridge approximately 330 km long and 100 km wide, associated with the Cocos-Nazca volcanic province (Marcaillou et al., 2006). Numerous submerged rocky pinnacles, ridges and cones characterize the ridge. These geological features, together with the island's geographic isolation and local oceanographic conditions, provide habitat for diverse benthic communities and contribute to the development of distinct biological assemblages within the Eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean (ETPO), a region recognized for its high biodiversity, including endemic, resident, and migratory species (Enright et al., 2021). As a result, several world-renowned marine protected areas (MPAs) have been established in the region, including Malpelo Flora and Fauna Sanctuary (FFS), which has been designated as a World Heritage Site (UNESCO, 2026), and together with the Galapagos, as Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas (PSSAs) (IMO, 2026). However, most available information on marine biodiversity in the region is limited to shallow ecosystems within the photic zone, with comparatively little data on mesophotic and deeper habitats.Mesophotic Coral Ecosystems (MCEs) are typically defined as occurring at depths between 30 and 150 m depth and host diverse biological communities, often with high levels of endemism (Sinniger et al., 2016). These environments are characterized by low light availability, lower temperatures, reduced dissolved oxygen concentrations, and increased hydrostatic pressure, favoring specialized biological communities (Slattery et al., 2011;Baker et al., 2016). Although advances in underwater technologies, including remotely operated vehicles (ROVs), autonomous platforms, and mixed-gas diving, have improved access to mesophotic and deep-sea environments (Clark et al., 2006;Roberts et al., 2009), these habitats in the ETPO remain poorly documented due to logistical and technical constrains (Baker et al., 2016). In the Colombian Pacific, where deep-sea environments dominate much of the seafloor, biological and habitat mapping efforts remain limited, particularly around remote oceanic ridges and submarine elevations. Although exploratory initiatives have increased during the last decade (Cedeño-Posso et al. 2022b;Bessudo et al., 2022;Dueñas et al., 2024;Rodriguez-Toscano et al., 2025;Rodriguez-Toscano et al., 2026), many submarine features remain insufficiently characterized.Although Malpelo is widely recognized as an important aggregation site for pelagic species, including fishes, sharks, marine mammals, sea birds and sea turtles (Palacios et al., 2012), information on its mesophotic ecosystems (30-150 m depth) remain scarce. A review of datasets available through the Marine Biodiversity Information System of Colombia (SIBM), OBIS and GBIF revealed only 75 historical records for these depth ranges, primarily concentrated between 40-50 m and dating back to the early 2000s. Thes