The use of inoculants to meet nitrogen demand in common bean crops is still limited among farmers. However, strategies such as co-inoculation and top-dressing re-inoculation have emerged as promising alternatives capable of improving nodulation and reducing mineral nitrogen dependency in common bean. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of different inoculation techniques, co-inoculation with Rhizobium tropici and Azospirillum brasilense , and top-dressing re-inoculation on the morphophysiological and agronomic performance of common bean. The experiment was conducted during the 2024/2025 wet season using a randomized block design with four replications and twelve treatments: T1 – Seed inoculation with R. tropici ; T2 – In-furrow inoculation with R. tropici ; T3 – Top-dressing inoculation with R. tropici ; T4 – Seed co-inoculation ( R. tropici + A. brasilense ); T5 – In-furrow co-inoculation ( R. tropici + A. brasilense ); T6 – Top-dressing co-inoculation ( R. tropici + A. brasilense ); T7 – T1 + subsequent top-dressing re-inoculation; T8 – T2 + subsequent top-dressing re-inoculation; T9 – T4 + subsequent top-dressing re-inoculation; T10 – T5 + subsequent top-dressing re-inoculation; T11 – Control without any N source; T12 – Mineral N fertilization at sowing and top-dressing (100 kg ha -1 N). Results indicated that co-inoculation and re-inoculation techniques provided the best performance in terms of nodulation, morphophysiological aspects and agronomic characteristics of common bean. Treatments involving co-inoculation of R. tropici with A. brasilense , regardless of the application method, followed by top-dressing re-inoculation, resulted in grain yields of up to 3,042 kg ha -1 , a value equivalent to that obtained with mineral nitrogen fertilization. The use of inoculants through co-inoculation combined with top-dressing re-inoculation represents an effective and sustainable strategy for integrated nutrient management, reducing the dependency on nitrogen fertilizers, promoting yield gains, cost reduction, and mitigation of environmental impacts.