Evaluation of sedimentary phosphorus fractions and their association with the eutrophication process in two central Argentinian reservoirs | PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website.
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Main navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Apply for support 
 
 
 FAQ 
 
 
 Be involved 
 
 
 Jobs 
 
 
 Subscribe 
 
 
 Contact 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 Join PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search toggle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About 
 
 
 
 
 PAGES 
 
 PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 General overview 
 
 
 Mission statement 
 
 
 PAGES logos 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SSC 
 
 SSC 
 
 
 
 
 Current 
 
 
 PAGES fellows 
 
 
 Meeting minutes 
 
 
 Join 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IPO 
 
 IPO 
 
 
 
 
 Staff 
 
 
 Visit us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Supporters and partners 
 
 Supporters and partners 
 
 
 
 
 Supporters 
 
 
 SCNAT 
 
 
 CAS 
 
 
 UniBE 
 
 
 
 
 
 Parent organization 
 
 
 Future Earth 
 
 
 
 
 
 Scientific partners 
 
 
 WCRP 
 
 
 WDS-Paleo 
 
 
 World Data System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Info 
 
 Info 
 
 
 
 
 FAQs 
 
 
 Code of Conduct 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Be involved 
 
 Be involved 
 
 
 
 
 Introduction 
 
 
 Join PAGES 
 
 
 Join WG mailing lists 
 
 
 Apply to be on the SSC 
 
 
 Write for PAGES Magazine 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Outreach 
 
 Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 Outreach and education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Stakeholder engagement 
 
 Stakeholder engagement 
 
 
 
 
 Engaging with stakeholders 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 General Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Science 
 
 
 
 
 Working Groups 
 
 Working Groups 
 
 
 
 
 Current 
 
 
 WG guidelines 
 
 
 Integrative Activities 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 Endorsed and affiliated 
 
 
 Former initiatives and groups 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Data 
 
 Data 
 
 
 
 
 Data stewardship 
 
 
 Data guidelines 
 
 
 PAGES databases 
 
 
 External databases 
 
 
 Data Stewardship Scholarship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meetings 
 
 Meetings 
 
 
 
 
 Open Science Meeting 
 
 
 Young Scientists Meeting 
 
 
 Shanghai 2025 
 
 
 Archive 
 
 
 
 
 
 Topical Science Meeting 
 
 
 PAGES webinars 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGES awardees 
 
 PAGES awardees 
 
 
 
 
 Scholarship recipients 
 
 
 Early-Career Award 
 
 
 Guest scientists 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PAGES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publications 
 
 
 
 
 
 Early-Career Network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu layer 3 left side 
 
 
 
 
 News 
 
 
 Calendar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu layer 3 right side 
 
 
 
 
 People 
 
 
 PAGES Journals 
 
 
 Past Global Changes Magazine 
 
 
 Past Global Changes Horizons 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Publications 
 
 
 PAGES Magazine 
 
 
 Evaluation of Sedimentary Phosphorus Fractions and Their Association With The Eutrophication Process In Two Central Argentinian Reservoirs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Evaluation of sedimentary phosphorus fractions and their association with the eutrophication process in two central Argentinian reservoirs
 
 
 Mengo L., Cardoso-Silva S., Pompeo M., Halac S. and Piovano E. 
 > Access contents of this issue 
 > Download this article as pdf 
 
 Past Global Changes Magazine 
 33(2) 
 80 
 2025 
 
 https://doi.org/10.22498/pages.33.2.80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mengo L. 1 , Cardoso-Silva S. 2 , Pompeo M. 3 , Halac S. 1 and Piovano E. 1 
 
 
 Dr. Luciana Mengo from Argentina visited the University of São Paulo, Brazil, as a PAGES-IAI International Mobility Research Fellow (7 March – 5 April 2025). She analyzed phosphorus (P) fractions in sediment cores and reconstructed their dynamics in two reservoirs in the Pampean Ranges, Argentina, during the last century. In this project, Luciana and her collaborators intended to expand the knowledge on contribution of phosphorus fractions to eutrophication in Pampean lacustrine systems. 
 
 
 
 Conceptual framework 
 Central Argentina has a gradient of humid to semi-arid climate from east to west. The building of reservoirs in the west has allowed for the continuous supply of water during times of drought, as well as flood attenuation during periods of excess water. In this region, the San Roque (SRr) and the Los Molinos reservoirs (LMr) supply the city of Cordoba with drinking water (Fig. 1a). Given the advanced state of eutrophication in both reservoirs (Bonansea et al. 2021; Rodriguez and Ruiz 2016), permanent water-quality monitoring was implemented in 1999, providing a unique source of data to cross-check reconstructions emerging from multi-proxy paleolimnological studies (e.g. Halac et al. 2020; Mengo et al. 2024). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1: (A) Location of San Roque Reservoir (SRr; above) and Los Molinos Reservoir (LMr; below) in Central Argentina. (B) Phosphorus fractions determined in TSR-22-II (above) and in TLM-25-I (below). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Since the reservoirs’ fluvial catchments include metamorphic complexes rich in apatites (Ca-P fraction), and human activities contribute a significant amount of P, total P is insufficient to identify the different sources of this nutrient. By evaluating the changes in content of different P fractions, it becomes possible to define the environmental baseline for each reservoir, whose basins are under intensive land use. Previous studies highlight bioavailability gradients in the P fractions ranging from low to high as non-apatitic P (Mn, Fe-P) > apatitic (Ca-P) > and organic P (Cavalcante et al. 2018). The reconstruction of P fractions in aquatic environments offers an insight into recent dynamics which enable a better understanding of their influence on the eutrophication process and, therefore, with land-use changes. 
 Activities developed 
 Core sediments from the center of the SR (TSR-22-II, length = 121 cm) and the LM reservoirs (TLM-25-I, length = 9 cm) (Fig. 1a) were recovered in 2022 and 2025 respectively, and analyzed for different P-fractions content (organic, total inorganic, and inorganic fractions of apatitic and non-apatitic P), following the separation protocol proposed by Ruban et al. (2001). The phosphorus content was determined spectrophotometrically (spectrophotometer-Spectronic 200) with the molybdenum blue method (Strickland and Parsons 1960). TSR-22-II ages were estimated from previous studies (Mengo et al. 2024). 
 Main results and conclusions 
 The estimated 210 Pb ages for core TSR-22-II ranged from 1870 to 2022 CE, while core TLM-25-I ages are unknown. In both reservoirs there is a trend of significantly higher quantities of inorganic P relative to organic P (Fig. 1b). Regarding the contribution of the inorganic P fractions, similar values are observed in TSR-22-II, with slightly higher values of apatitic P, while in TLM-25-I there is a noticeably higher proportion of the apatitic P in comparison to the non-apatitic fraction (Fig. 1b). Understanding the composition and dynamics of the different P fractions allow for a more accurate prediction of P bioavailability in sediments and in water columns through its release from sediments under certain conditions (e.g. anoxia). The higher proportion of inorganic P relative to the organic fraction in both reservoirs indicates a high bioavailability after P is released from the sediments. With respect to the differences observed between the apatitic and non-apatitic fractions, SRr sediments present a greater contribution from the non-apatitic fraction compared to the LMr, indicating higher bioavailability in this reservoir. Regarding organic P, this has been linked to the water content and a tendency to increase in the upper portion of both cores (Fig. 1b). This suggests an increased input of sewage effluents from anthropogenic activities on the internal P load of the systems in the last years. These results are a preliminary approach to disentangling P dynamics in artificial aquatic systems. Further, results are critical for drawing a more in-depth understanding to determine the environmental baseline of each system that make them more or less vulnerable to eutrophication. 
 affiliationS 
 1 Center of Research in Earth Science (CICTERRA) CONICET-University National of Córdoba, Argentina 
 2 Federal University of Alfenas (UNIFAL) ICT, Poços de Caldas, Brazil 
 3 Department of Ecology, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, Brazil 
 contact 
 Luciana Mengo: luciana.mengo.104 unc.edu.ar 
 references 
 Bonansea M et al. (2021) J S Am Earth Sci 108: 103243 
 Cavalcante H et al. (2018) Sci Tot Envi 619-620: 1022-1029 
 Halac S et al. (2020) J S Am Earth Sci 103: 102707 
 Mengo L et al. (2024) Anthropocene 46: 100437 
 Rodriguez MI, Ruiz M (2016) In: Wunderlin D (Ed) The Suquía River Basin (Córdoba, Argentina). Springer Cham, 37-59 
 Ruban V et al. (2001) Fresenius J Anal Chem 370: 224-228 
 Strickland JDH, Parsons TR (1960) Bull Fish Res Bel Can 125: 1-185 
 
 
 
 
 Category: 
 PAGES Magazine articles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Office 
 
 
 
 PAGES International Project Office University of Bern, Main Building Hochschulstrasse 4 3012 Bern Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact 
 
 
 
 Email: pages pages.unibe.ch - Phone: +41 (0)31 684 56 03 
 > how to find us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Social 
 
 
 
 - - - - - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Share 
 
 
 
 - - - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer menu 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 Privacy and Cookie policies 
 
 
 FAQ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 © Copyright 1991-2026 Pages