Introduction The jejunum is a key site for nutrient digestion and absorption in ruminants. However, prolonged feeding of high-concentrate diets impairs jejunal function and reduces growth performance, thereby lowering the economic profitability of cattle production. To address this issue, the present study investigated the regulatory effects of an alkaline mineral complex (AMC) on jejunal digestive and absorptive function in finishing beef cattle. Methods A total of 54 Simmental steers were randomly assigned to either a control group (n = 27) or an AMC-supplemented group (n = 27) in a 142-day feeding trial. At the end of the trial, ten cattle from each group were randomly selected and slaughtered. Jejunal contents, mucosa, and tissue samples were collected for subsequent biochemical assays, histopathological examination, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, metabolomic analysis, and proteomic analysis. Results Compared with the control, AMC supplementation markedly decreased jejunal malondialdehyde (MDA) concentrations and crypt depth ( P = 0.032), while concomitantly enhancing the mRNA abundance of the TJP1 ( P = 0.029). Despite minimal alterations in overall jejunal microbial community architecture, distinct taxonomic shifts were observed, characterized by increased relative abundances of Cyanobacteria ( P = 0.037) and Olsenella ( P = 0.038) in the AMC group. Metabolomic profiling further demonstrated an accumulation of bioactive metabolites, including small peptides, short-chain fatty acids, and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), following AMC. Consistent with these metabolic changes, proteomic analysis revealed differential expression of proteins predominantly involved in cellular metabolism and mitochondrial function. Moreover, integrative multi-omics enrichment analyses converged on the protein digestion and absorption pathway, alongside a significant upregulation of key nutrient transporters, such as SNAT2 ( P = 0.0172), LAT2 ( P = 0.0338), and FABP2 ( P = 0.0466). Discussion Taken together, these results suggest that AMC is closely associated with an improved jejunal redox environment, reinforcement of epithelial barrier–related molecular features, and coordinated modulation of nutrient absorption–related pathways, thereby providing mechanistic evidence for the potential of AMC to support intestinal functionality and nutrient utilization in finishing cattle.