lobally, wetlands are known for their ecological benefits given the role they play, ranging from providing buffers against storms to providing habitat for wildlife and aquatic organisms, as well as flood control and improvement of water quality. South Sudan is host to one of the world’s largest wetlands, the Sudd Wetland, which stretches up to about 57,000 km². Unfortunately, this important ecosystem hotspot concomitantly plays host to significant oil and gas deposits, the exploitation of which causes enormous ecological damage, begging for adequate environmental protection. This paper examines the adequacy of the legal and regulatory regimes in addressing environmental concerns arisings oil and gas activities in South Sudan, emphasizing on the Sudd Wetland. Using a doctrinal research methodology, the paper analyzes South Sudan’s nascent and evolving legal and regulatory frameworks for the protection of wetlands, contrasting with more developed legal systems like Kenya and Uganda, which also demonstrate a higher level of environmental awareness and activism. The study’s findings reveal significant gaps in legal and regulatory frameworks combined with weaknesses in enforcement mechanisms. Apart from the designation of Wetlands of International Importance, South Sudan has yet to implement one of its core responsibilities under the Ramsar Convention, which requires contracting parties to formulate and implement regulations to promote the conservation of the wetlands included in the List of wetlands designated under Article 2. As a result, the country ranks low in terms of legal and policy frameworks on wetland protection. The absence of a specific wetland protection legal regime is exacerbated by other non-legal factors, including lack of adequate funding, insecurity and inaccessibility, limited capacity (technical experts), limited awareness, and lack of stakeholder involvement (civil society, local community, CBOs, NGOs, etc.). The paper argues that the adoption of more comprehensive and proactive measures encompassing legislative and regulatory frameworks, capacity building, inclusivity and stakeholder engagement, as well as strong institutional and judicial enforcement, is essential for achieving sustainable wetland protection in oil and gas exploration and production in South Sudan.