From under-ice accumulation to open-water oxidation: microbial regulation of methane emissions in high-altitude proglacial lakes | Microbiome | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 From under-ice accumulation to open-water oxidation: microbial regulation of methane emissions in high-altitude proglacial lakes 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 14 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 From under-ice accumulation to open-water oxidation: microbial regulation of methane emissions in high-altitude proglacial lakes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Meiqi Huang 1 , Shengjie Li 3 , Guangli Mu 1 , Ran Yan 1 , Xiaodong Li 2 , Qing Yang 1 , Bo Shao 1 , Bingya Zhang 2 , Qianggong Zhang 4 & … Yindong Tong  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0503-6585 1 , 2   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 138 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background Proglacial lakes, formed by global warming and accelerating deglaciation, represent widespread yet poorly constrained sources of methane (CH 4 ). Although their emissions are closely associated with ice-cover and ice-free conditions, the microbial mechanisms underlying these dynamics are not understood. Here, we integrated multi-season field observations, stable isotope analyses, metagenomic sequencing, and incubation experiments to investigate microbial controls on seasonal CH 4 cycling in newly formed high-altitude proglacial lakes on the Tibetan Plateau. Results We observed substantial accumulation of dissolved CH 4 in the water column even during the ice-covered period (ICP), despite the enrichment of anaerobic methanotrophs (Candidatus Methylomirabilota) in sediments. Isotope analysis showed that CH 4 oxidation was active during the early ICP but became limited during the late ICP, leading to continued CH 4 accumulation. Following the transition to the ablation period (AP), acetoclastic methanogenesis ( Methanosarcina ) rapidly recovered in bottom sediments. Concurrently, significant aerobic methanotrophy ( Methylobacter ) was established in surface sediments. Temperature was strongly associated with the shift of methanogenic and methanotrophic communities from the ICP to the AP. This microbial reorganization was accompanied by an increased relative abundance of CH 4 metabolism genes and enhanced functional coupling among CH 4 , nitrogen, and sulfur cycling pathways. Conclusions Overall, our findings demonstrate that microbial succession contributes to the seasonal transition from net CH 4 accumulation beneath the ice to net CH 4 consumption during open-water conditions. Given the potentially greater temperature sensitivity of methanogenesis relative to methanotrophy, continued climate warming may disrupt the balance, potentially transforming rapidly expanding proglacial lakes into stronger sources of atmospheric CH 4 . 
 Video Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbial community structure and function and their linkages with methane production in sediments of thermokarst lakes on the Tibetan Plateau
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 29 June 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Insights into the critical processes of methane biogeochemical cycling in inland freshwater ecosystems: a systematic review
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 08 May 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A combined microbial and biogeochemical dataset from high-latitude ecosystems with respect to methane cycle
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 04 November 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Cryospheric Science 
 
 
 
 Microbial Biooceanography 
 
 
 
 Microbial Ecology 
 
 
 
 Palaeoclimate 
 
 
 
 Environmental Microbiology 
 
 
 
 Water Microbiology 
 
 
 
 Microbial Community Dynamics in Aquatic Ecosystems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements We greatly appreciated Prof. Ruoyu Sun for guidance and assistance during fieldwork and chemical analyses. Funding This study was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. U24A20640 and 42377399) and the Key Research and Development Project of Xizang Autonomous Region (Nos. XZ202601ZY0128, XZ202502ZY0019, and XZ202502ZY0047), and the Base and Talent Development Project of Xizang Autonomous Region (No. XZ202502JD0025). Author information Authors and Affiliations School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China Meiqi Huang, Guangli Mu, Ran Yan, Qing Yang, Bo Shao & Yindong Tong School of Ecology and Environment, Xizang University, Lhasa, 850000, China Xiaodong Li, Bingya Zhang & Yindong Tong State Key Laboratory of Submarine Geoscience, and School of Oceanography, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200030, China Shengjie Li State Key Laboratory of Tibetan Plateau Earth System, Environment and Resources (TPESER), Institute of Tibetan Plateau Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China Qianggong Zhang Authors Meiqi Huang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Shengjie Li View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Guangli Mu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ran Yan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xiaodong Li View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Qing Yang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Bo Shao View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Bingya Zhang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Qianggong Zhang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yindong Tong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Yindong Tong . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information 40168_2026_2537_MOESM1_ESM.docx (download DOCX ) Supplementary Material 1: Figure S1. Study design to investigate seasonal variation of methane dynamics and microbial communities in emerging proglacial lakes on the Tibetan Plateau. Figure S2. A hole in the lake ice (A) and sediment cores (B) from the investigated proglacial lakes during the ice-covered period. Figure S3. The average relative abundance of methanogens and methanotrophs in lake water and sediments of emerging proglacial lakes on the Tibetan Plateau revealed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Figure S4. Changes in the proportion of genes involved in key nitrogen- and sulfur-cycling pathways across different ablation stages. Figure S5. Co-occurrence networks of functional genes in the microbiomes of proglacial lake sediments. Figure S6. Phylogenetic trees of metagenomic assembled genomes (MAGs) affiliated with methanogens and methanotrophs in the microbiomes of lake sediments. Figure S7. Metabolic potentials of the Methanosarcina and Methylobacter -like revealed by metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs). Figure S8. Mantel test analysis between environmental factors and microbial communities (A) and correlation analysis between functional genes and dissolved methane concentrations (B). Table S1. Genes with ambiguous annotations in the KEGG database. Table S2. Summary statistics of physicochemical variables shown in Fig. 1. Table S3. The features of medium-high-quality metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) acquired facilitated with Methylobacter -like from the microbiomes in proglacial lakes. Table S4. The full name of functional enzymes involved in methane, nitrogen, and sulfur metabolisms. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Huang, M., Li, S., Mu, G. et al. From under-ice accumulation to open-water oxidation: microbial regulation of methane emissions in high-altitude proglacial lakes.
 Microbiome (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-026-02537-z Download citation Received : 13 February 2026 Accepted : 26 August 2026 Published : 14 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-026-02537-z Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Global warming Proglacial lakes Methane emissions Seasonal dynamics Microbial mechanisms Aerobic methanotrophy 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Yindong Tong 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature