Abstract The moult represents an important seasonal change in the physiology of phocid seals. However, physiological measurements are challenging due to the impracticalities of instrumenting moulting animals. The aim of this study was (i) to assess the feasibility of a long-term deployment of fully implantable loggers to measure heart rate (HR) and sub-blubber temperature (T b ) in harbour seals ( Phoca vitulina ) and (ii) to compare HR and T b during moult and post-moult periods. Loggers were surgically implanted on an adult and sub-adult harbour seal in captivity. Animals healed quickly from surgery and loggers provided 65 days of continuous data before removal of the device. Results showed that in the adult when hauled out and in the water HR was lower during the moult compared with the post-moult. For the sub-adult, HR while in the water was also higher during the post-moult, however, when hauled out there was no difference in HR between the moult and post-moult periods. When hauled out, T b was greater for both animals during the moult compared with the post-moult. During haulout events, T b increased over time in both periods and T b in both animals was lower during post moult compared to the moult period. In the sub-adult, T b decreased with time in the water during the moult but showed little change during the post-moult period, whereas no temporal change was evident in the adult during either period. This study demonstrated that fully implantable loggers are a useful research tool allowing measurement of physiological parameters that are otherwise difficult to measure in pinnipeds. Physiological measurements suggested that the requirement to maintain higher skin temperature for hair growth during the moult was offset by lower metabolism to save energy in water, and on land in the case of adults. However, a decrease in body temperature with time in water in the sub-adult indicated that a smaller body size and less well-developed blubber layer is not as effective in reducing heat loss compared to adults. Future physio-logging on pinnipeds throughout their annual lifecycle may therefore benefit from similar techniques used to implant loggers.