Abstract One of the ‘classic’ challenges in implementing EU environmental law and national law in the Member States concerns the clash between an adaptability requirement and the inflexibility of outdated permits having a significant negative environmental impact. Such adaptability provisions are a core element of many important EU directives in this field of law. In this article, the authors illustrate this conflict using the example of the Water Framework Directive (WFD) and permits for hydropower installations in Sweden. These permits were commonly issued in the first half of the 20 th century as part of the country’s industrialisation and with little or no concern for the environment. The WFD obliges Member States to meet the binding environmental objectives set out in Article 4 and to review and update hydropower permits when necessary. Against this backdrop, the EU Commission has initiated infringement proceedings against twelve Member States for failing to implement the requirements of Article 11 of the Directive. The case against Sweden is particularly useful because the communications in these cases are open to the public, making it possible to study the arguments of the parties involved. In this case, the Commission contends that Sweden is failing to fulfil its obligation to regularly review hydropower permits in accordance with Article 11.3 of the WFD. According to this provision, ‘automatic’ reviews should be undertaken at least once between 2009 and 2027, and no later than twelve years after the adoption of Programmes of Measures. In turn, the Swedish government argues that the requirement in the WFD for the regular review and necessary updating of regulations concerning hydroelectric power stations and dams has been transposed into Swedish law through the provisions on review of modern environmental conditions for hydropower installations. This is in addition to the supervisory authority’s obligation to supervise water activities, and the possibility of review and revocation prior to the regulated date under certain circumstances. Permits for hydropower installations in Sweden are often old and have ‘eternal’ validity. Although the law provides for reviews and updates, very few have been carried out since the introduction of the Environmental Code in 1998. In 2019, Sweden launched a national plan for hydropower permit reviews (NAP) using the derogation possibility in Article 4.4 WFD, with a schedule for the introduction of ‘modern permits’ for these installations. As the schedule extends well beyond 2027 into the 2040s, the Commission seems to have a strong case. However, given that the NAP includes almost 2,000 hydropower installations, and bearing in mind that the WFD allows Member States to apply different kinds of derogation from the environmental objectives, the outcome is not evident. In any event, as much of this controversy lies at the heart of the WFD and its interaction with traditional permit regimes, it would be interest