Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs
 - Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main navigation 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact & Help 
 Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search content at Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Research units 
 
 
 
 Research output 
 
 
 
 Datasets 
 
 
 
 Projects 
 
 
 
 Press/Media 
 
 
 
 Activities 
 
 
 
 Prizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs 
 Zixuan Yuan , Yiben Cheng * , Zhiming Xin , Yuxuan Liu , Tao Yu , Jingwen Li , Lixia Chu * Corresponding author for this work 
 Environmental Technology 
 
 Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 Precipitation in arid regions typically occurs as short, pulsed events that simultaneously alter atmospheric humidity and soil moisture, making it difficult to disentangle their respective effects on plant water transport. This study aimed to isolate the atmospheric pathway and quantify sap flow responses of two desert shrubs, Haloxylon ammodendron and Tamarix ramosissima, to pulsed rainfall events. Controlled rainfall experiments (2, 6, and 10 mm) were conducted at three times of day (morning, afternoon, and night) during the peak growing season (June–August) of 2024 and 2025 in the Ulan Buh Desert. Sap flow was continuously monitored in primary branches, main trunks, and roots. Sap flow responses depended on rainfall timing, rainfall amount, and species. Rainfall events generally reduced sap flow relative to pre-event conditions and often induced transient reverse flow, defined here as a temporary reversal of xylem water movement from aboveground tissues toward stems or roots, particularly at night. Nighttime rainfall produced the strongest responses, indicating that atmospheric moisture inputs can rapidly modify plant water potential gradients. Responses showed clear threshold-like patterns: H. ammodendron was more sensitive to small and moderate rainfall pulses (∼6 mm), whereas T. ramosissima generally required larger inputs (∼10 mm) to produce comparable responses. Response lags followed a top–down sequence, with faster adjustments in aboveground organs and delayed responses in roots, and these patterns differed between species. Among the meteorological drivers examined, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) explained the largest proportion of sap flow variability across species and organs. These results indicate that small, well-timed rainfall pulses, especially those occurring at night, can temporarily regulate plant water transport through atmospheric pathways. The findings improve our understanding of soil–plant–atmosphere interactions in arid ecosystems and provide insights for vegetation restoration and water management under pulsed water availability. 
 Original language English Article number 136045 Journal Journal of Hydrology Volume 678 DOIs https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 Publication status Published - Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 Keywords Foliar water uptake Hydraulic redistribution Rainfall pulses Reverse sap flow Ulan Buh Desert 
 
 
 
 Access to Document 
 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 https://edepot.wur.nl/720752 Licence: Taverne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 Dive into the research topics of 'Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sap Flow 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Atmospherics 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 33% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Transportation 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 33% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Water Management 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Photosynthetically Active Radiation 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Growing Season 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Soil Moisture 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Potential Gradient 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 16% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View full fingerprint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this 
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 Author
 
 
 
 BIBTEX
 
 
 
 Harvard
 
 
 
 Standard
 
 
 
 RIS
 
 
 
 Vancouver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yuan, Z., Cheng, Y., Xin, Z., Liu, Y., Yu, T., Li, J. , & Chu, L. (2026). Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs . Journal of Hydrology , 678 , Article 136045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 
 
 
 
 Yuan, Zixuan ; Cheng, Yiben ; Xin, Zhiming et al. / Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs . In: Journal of Hydrology . 2026 ; Vol. 678. 
 
 
 
 @article{07876b74700146489257e384256da359, title = "Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs", abstract = "Precipitation in arid regions typically occurs as short, pulsed events that simultaneously alter atmospheric humidity and soil moisture, making it difficult to disentangle their respective effects on plant water transport. This study aimed to isolate the atmospheric pathway and quantify sap flow responses of two desert shrubs, Haloxylon ammodendron and Tamarix ramosissima, to pulsed rainfall events. Controlled rainfall experiments (2, 6, and 10 mm) were conducted at three times of day (morning, afternoon, and night) during the peak growing season (June–August) of 2024 and 2025 in the Ulan Buh Desert. Sap flow was continuously monitored in primary branches, main trunks, and roots. Sap flow responses depended on rainfall timing, rainfall amount, and species. Rainfall events generally reduced sap flow relative to pre-event conditions and often induced transient reverse flow, defined here as a temporary reversal of xylem water movement from aboveground tissues toward stems or roots, particularly at night. Nighttime rainfall produced the strongest responses, indicating that atmospheric moisture inputs can rapidly modify plant water potential gradients. Responses showed clear threshold-like patterns: H. ammodendron was more sensitive to small and moderate rainfall pulses (∼6 mm), whereas T. ramosissima generally required larger inputs (∼10 mm) to produce comparable responses. Response lags followed a top–down sequence, with faster adjustments in aboveground organs and delayed responses in roots, and these patterns differed between species. Among the meteorological drivers examined, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) explained the largest proportion of sap flow variability across species and organs. These results indicate that small, well-timed rainfall pulses, especially those occurring at night, can temporarily regulate plant water transport through atmospheric pathways. The findings improve our understanding of soil–plant–atmosphere interactions in arid ecosystems and provide insights for vegetation restoration and water management under pulsed water availability.", keywords = "Foliar water uptake, Hydraulic redistribution, Rainfall pulses, Reverse sap flow, Ulan Buh Desert", author = "Zixuan Yuan and Yiben Cheng and Zhiming Xin and Yuxuan Liu and Tao Yu and Jingwen Li and Lixia Chu", year = "2026", month = oct, doi = "10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045", language = "English", volume = "678", journal = "Journal of Hydrology", issn = "0022-1694", publisher = "Elsevier", } 
 
 
 
 Yuan, Z, Cheng, Y, Xin, Z, Liu, Y, Yu, T, Li, J & Chu, L 2026, ' Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs ', Journal of Hydrology , vol. 678, 136045. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 
 
 
 
 Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs. / Yuan, Zixuan; Cheng, Yiben; Xin, Zhiming et al. In: Journal of Hydrology , Vol. 678, 136045, 10.2026. Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 TY - JOUR T1 - Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs AU - Yuan, Zixuan AU - Cheng, Yiben AU - Xin, Zhiming AU - Liu, Yuxuan AU - Yu, Tao AU - Li, Jingwen AU - Chu, Lixia PY - 2026/10 Y1 - 2026/10 N2 - Precipitation in arid regions typically occurs as short, pulsed events that simultaneously alter atmospheric humidity and soil moisture, making it difficult to disentangle their respective effects on plant water transport. This study aimed to isolate the atmospheric pathway and quantify sap flow responses of two desert shrubs, Haloxylon ammodendron and Tamarix ramosissima, to pulsed rainfall events. Controlled rainfall experiments (2, 6, and 10 mm) were conducted at three times of day (morning, afternoon, and night) during the peak growing season (June–August) of 2024 and 2025 in the Ulan Buh Desert. Sap flow was continuously monitored in primary branches, main trunks, and roots. Sap flow responses depended on rainfall timing, rainfall amount, and species. Rainfall events generally reduced sap flow relative to pre-event conditions and often induced transient reverse flow, defined here as a temporary reversal of xylem water movement from aboveground tissues toward stems or roots, particularly at night. Nighttime rainfall produced the strongest responses, indicating that atmospheric moisture inputs can rapidly modify plant water potential gradients. Responses showed clear threshold-like patterns: H. ammodendron was more sensitive to small and moderate rainfall pulses (∼6 mm), whereas T. ramosissima generally required larger inputs (∼10 mm) to produce comparable responses. Response lags followed a top–down sequence, with faster adjustments in aboveground organs and delayed responses in roots, and these patterns differed between species. Among the meteorological drivers examined, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) explained the largest proportion of sap flow variability across species and organs. These results indicate that small, well-timed rainfall pulses, especially those occurring at night, can temporarily regulate plant water transport through atmospheric pathways. The findings improve our understanding of soil–plant–atmosphere interactions in arid ecosystems and provide insights for vegetation restoration and water management under pulsed water availability. AB - Precipitation in arid regions typically occurs as short, pulsed events that simultaneously alter atmospheric humidity and soil moisture, making it difficult to disentangle their respective effects on plant water transport. This study aimed to isolate the atmospheric pathway and quantify sap flow responses of two desert shrubs, Haloxylon ammodendron and Tamarix ramosissima, to pulsed rainfall events. Controlled rainfall experiments (2, 6, and 10 mm) were conducted at three times of day (morning, afternoon, and night) during the peak growing season (June–August) of 2024 and 2025 in the Ulan Buh Desert. Sap flow was continuously monitored in primary branches, main trunks, and roots. Sap flow responses depended on rainfall timing, rainfall amount, and species. Rainfall events generally reduced sap flow relative to pre-event conditions and often induced transient reverse flow, defined here as a temporary reversal of xylem water movement from aboveground tissues toward stems or roots, particularly at night. Nighttime rainfall produced the strongest responses, indicating that atmospheric moisture inputs can rapidly modify plant water potential gradients. Responses showed clear threshold-like patterns: H. ammodendron was more sensitive to small and moderate rainfall pulses (∼6 mm), whereas T. ramosissima generally required larger inputs (∼10 mm) to produce comparable responses. Response lags followed a top–down sequence, with faster adjustments in aboveground organs and delayed responses in roots, and these patterns differed between species. Among the meteorological drivers examined, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) explained the largest proportion of sap flow variability across species and organs. These results indicate that small, well-timed rainfall pulses, especially those occurring at night, can temporarily regulate plant water transport through atmospheric pathways. The findings improve our understanding of soil–plant–atmosphere interactions in arid ecosystems and provide insights for vegetation restoration and water management under pulsed water availability. KW - Foliar water uptake KW - Hydraulic redistribution KW - Rainfall pulses KW - Reverse sap flow KW - Ulan Buh Desert U2 - 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 DO - 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 M3 - Article AN - SCOPUS:105045193666 SN - 0022-1694 VL - 678 JO - Journal of Hydrology JF - Journal of Hydrology M1 - 136045 ER - 
 
 
 
 Yuan Z, Cheng Y, Xin Z, Liu Y, Yu T, Li J et al. Rainfall event timing and thresholds govern reverse sap flow in desert shrubs . Journal of Hydrology . 2026 Oct;678:136045. doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2026.136045 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Powered by Pure Link opens in a new tab , Scopus Link opens in a new tab & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine&trade; Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 All content on this site: Copyright &copy; 2026 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply
 
 We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research data protection policy Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 About web accessibility Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report vulnerability Link opens in a new tab