A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems
 - Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main navigation 
 Skip to search 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact & Help 
 Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search content at Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Research units 
 
 
 
 Research output 
 
 
 
 Datasets 
 
 
 
 Projects 
 
 
 
 Press/Media 
 
 
 
 Activities 
 
 
 
 Prizes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems 
 Hadiyanto Hadiyanto * , Indra Bayu Vimono , Hendrik Alexander William Cappenberg , Ludi Parwadani Aji , Teddy Triandiza , Ana Setyastuti , Ismiliana Wirawati , Ernawati Widyastuti , Rianta Pratiwi , Putri Saphira Ibrahim , Tyani Fitrian , Allsay Kitsash Addifisyukha Cintra , Ucu Yanu Arbi , Muhammad Abrar , Tri Aryono Hadi * Corresponding author for this work 
 Aquaculture biology and Fisheries ecology WIMEK 
 
 Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overview 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract 
 Benthic invertebrate assemblages are often assessed in coral reef monitoring owing to their ecological and economic importance, yet a biotic index for assessing the ecological health of these assemblages has not yet been developed. This index is useful for stakeholders to help design management actions, including conservation and restoration of target taxa. In this study, we developed a new biotic index to assess the ecological health of benthic invertebrates on the basis of coral reef monitoring data from 38 locations (8–19 sites per location) across Indonesia (n = 464 sites). At each site, a belt transect of 2 m × 70 m was performed to collect invertebrate data (Holothuroidea, Tridacninae, Palinuridae, Trochidae, Acanthaster planci, Diadema, Drupella, and Linckia laevigata) and benthic habitat data. The index was constructed on the basis of the ecological quality ratio concept (the ratio between observed and reference values) using 11 metrics from training data (n = 389 sites) and validated by that on the basis of testing data (n = 75 sites). The index was also validated by evaluating the linear regression between the index and anthropogenic pressures, and ranged between 0 (very poor) and 1 (very good). The index ecological quality ratio of invertebrates (EQR inv ) decreased with declining water quality and increasing fishing pressure but increased with habitat heterogeneity (p < 0.05). This suggests that the EQR inv could indicate the presence of poor water quality, overfishing, and habitat modification in coral reef ecosystems. Based on our index, the ecological health of benthic invertebrate assemblages in Indonesian coral reef ecosystems was fair, with a mean EQR inv of 0.47. The EQR inv can improve the assessment of coral reef health in Indonesia and can also be applied across the tropical Indo-Pacific to support coral reef conservation and management. 
 Original language English Article number 75 Number of pages 20 Journal Aquatic Sciences Volume 88 Issue number 3 DOIs https://doi.org/10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 Publication status Published - Jul 2026 
 
 
 
 Keywords Coral reef monitoring Ecological health Fishing pressure Habitat heterogeneity Water quality 
 
 
 
 Access to Document 
 10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 https://edepot.wur.nl/716219 Licence: Taverne 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fingerprint 
 
 
 Dive into the research topics of 'A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems'. Together they form a unique fingerprint.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coral Reef 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indonesia 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 28% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Biotic Index 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 28% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Water Quality 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 28% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Overfishing 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 14% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monitoring Data 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 14% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pacific 
 Earth and Planetary Sciences 
 14% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View full fingerprint
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this 
 
 
 
 APA
 
 
 
 Author
 
 
 
 BIBTEX
 
 
 
 Harvard
 
 
 
 Standard
 
 
 
 RIS
 
 
 
 Vancouver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hadiyanto, H., Vimono, I. B., Cappenberg, H. A. W., Aji, L. P., Triandiza, T., Setyastuti, A., Wirawati, I., Widyastuti, E., Pratiwi, R., Ibrahim, P. S., Fitrian, T., Cintra, A. K. A., Arbi, U. Y., Abrar, M., & Hadi, T. A. (2026). A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems . Aquatic Sciences , 88 (3), Article 75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 
 
 
 
 Hadiyanto, Hadiyanto ; Vimono, Indra Bayu ; Cappenberg, Hendrik Alexander William et al. / A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems . In: Aquatic Sciences . 2026 ; Vol. 88, No. 3. 
 
 
 
 @article{244613aa64d4452dae3a86b811affade, title = "A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems", abstract = "Benthic invertebrate assemblages are often assessed in coral reef monitoring owing to their ecological and economic importance, yet a biotic index for assessing the ecological health of these assemblages has not yet been developed. This index is useful for stakeholders to help design management actions, including conservation and restoration of target taxa. In this study, we developed a new biotic index to assess the ecological health of benthic invertebrates on the basis of coral reef monitoring data from 38 locations (8–19 sites per location) across Indonesia (n = 464 sites). At each site, a belt transect of 2 m × 70 m was performed to collect invertebrate data (Holothuroidea, Tridacninae, Palinuridae, Trochidae, Acanthaster planci, Diadema, Drupella, and Linckia laevigata) and benthic habitat data. The index was constructed on the basis of the ecological quality ratio concept (the ratio between observed and reference values) using 11 metrics from training data (n = 389 sites) and validated by that on the basis of testing data (n = 75 sites). The index was also validated by evaluating the linear regression between the index and anthropogenic pressures, and ranged between 0 (very poor) and 1 (very good). The index ecological quality ratio of invertebrates (EQRinv) decreased with declining water quality and increasing fishing pressure but increased with habitat heterogeneity (p < 0.05). This suggests that the EQRinv could indicate the presence of poor water quality, overfishing, and habitat modification in coral reef ecosystems. Based on our index, the ecological health of benthic invertebrate assemblages in Indonesian coral reef ecosystems was fair, with a mean EQRinv of 0.47. The EQRinv can improve the assessment of coral reef health in Indonesia and can also be applied across the tropical Indo-Pacific to support coral reef conservation and management.", keywords = "Coral reef monitoring, Ecological health, Fishing pressure, Habitat heterogeneity, Water quality", author = "Hadiyanto Hadiyanto and Vimono, \{Indra Bayu\} and Cappenberg, \{Hendrik Alexander William\} and Aji, \{Ludi Parwadani\} and Teddy Triandiza and Ana Setyastuti and Ismiliana Wirawati and Ernawati Widyastuti and Rianta Pratiwi and Ibrahim, \{Putri Saphira\} and Tyani Fitrian and Cintra, \{Allsay Kitsash Addifisyukha\} and Arbi, \{Ucu Yanu\} and Muhammad Abrar and Hadi, \{Tri Aryono\}", year = "2026", month = jul, doi = "10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1", language = "English", volume = "88", journal = "Aquatic Sciences", issn = "1015-1621", publisher = "Springer", number = "3", } 
 
 
 
 Hadiyanto, H, Vimono, IB, Cappenberg, HAW, Aji, LP, Triandiza, T, Setyastuti, A, Wirawati, I, Widyastuti, E, Pratiwi, R, Ibrahim, PS, Fitrian, T, Cintra, AKA, Arbi, UY, Abrar, M & Hadi, TA 2026, ' A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems ', Aquatic Sciences , vol. 88, no. 3, 75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 
 
 
 
 A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems. / Hadiyanto, Hadiyanto; Vimono, Indra Bayu; Cappenberg, Hendrik Alexander William et al. In: Aquatic Sciences , Vol. 88, No. 3, 75, 07.2026. Research output : Contribution to journal › Article › Academic › peer-review 
 
 
 
 TY - JOUR T1 - A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems AU - Hadiyanto, Hadiyanto AU - Vimono, Indra Bayu AU - Cappenberg, Hendrik Alexander William AU - Aji, Ludi Parwadani AU - Triandiza, Teddy AU - Setyastuti, Ana AU - Wirawati, Ismiliana AU - Widyastuti, Ernawati AU - Pratiwi, Rianta AU - Ibrahim, Putri Saphira AU - Fitrian, Tyani AU - Cintra, Allsay Kitsash Addifisyukha AU - Arbi, Ucu Yanu AU - Abrar, Muhammad AU - Hadi, Tri Aryono PY - 2026/7 Y1 - 2026/7 N2 - Benthic invertebrate assemblages are often assessed in coral reef monitoring owing to their ecological and economic importance, yet a biotic index for assessing the ecological health of these assemblages has not yet been developed. This index is useful for stakeholders to help design management actions, including conservation and restoration of target taxa. In this study, we developed a new biotic index to assess the ecological health of benthic invertebrates on the basis of coral reef monitoring data from 38 locations (8–19 sites per location) across Indonesia (n = 464 sites). At each site, a belt transect of 2 m × 70 m was performed to collect invertebrate data (Holothuroidea, Tridacninae, Palinuridae, Trochidae, Acanthaster planci, Diadema, Drupella, and Linckia laevigata) and benthic habitat data. The index was constructed on the basis of the ecological quality ratio concept (the ratio between observed and reference values) using 11 metrics from training data (n = 389 sites) and validated by that on the basis of testing data (n = 75 sites). The index was also validated by evaluating the linear regression between the index and anthropogenic pressures, and ranged between 0 (very poor) and 1 (very good). The index ecological quality ratio of invertebrates (EQRinv) decreased with declining water quality and increasing fishing pressure but increased with habitat heterogeneity (p < 0.05). This suggests that the EQRinv could indicate the presence of poor water quality, overfishing, and habitat modification in coral reef ecosystems. Based on our index, the ecological health of benthic invertebrate assemblages in Indonesian coral reef ecosystems was fair, with a mean EQRinv of 0.47. The EQRinv can improve the assessment of coral reef health in Indonesia and can also be applied across the tropical Indo-Pacific to support coral reef conservation and management. AB - Benthic invertebrate assemblages are often assessed in coral reef monitoring owing to their ecological and economic importance, yet a biotic index for assessing the ecological health of these assemblages has not yet been developed. This index is useful for stakeholders to help design management actions, including conservation and restoration of target taxa. In this study, we developed a new biotic index to assess the ecological health of benthic invertebrates on the basis of coral reef monitoring data from 38 locations (8–19 sites per location) across Indonesia (n = 464 sites). At each site, a belt transect of 2 m × 70 m was performed to collect invertebrate data (Holothuroidea, Tridacninae, Palinuridae, Trochidae, Acanthaster planci, Diadema, Drupella, and Linckia laevigata) and benthic habitat data. The index was constructed on the basis of the ecological quality ratio concept (the ratio between observed and reference values) using 11 metrics from training data (n = 389 sites) and validated by that on the basis of testing data (n = 75 sites). The index was also validated by evaluating the linear regression between the index and anthropogenic pressures, and ranged between 0 (very poor) and 1 (very good). The index ecological quality ratio of invertebrates (EQRinv) decreased with declining water quality and increasing fishing pressure but increased with habitat heterogeneity (p < 0.05). This suggests that the EQRinv could indicate the presence of poor water quality, overfishing, and habitat modification in coral reef ecosystems. Based on our index, the ecological health of benthic invertebrate assemblages in Indonesian coral reef ecosystems was fair, with a mean EQRinv of 0.47. The EQRinv can improve the assessment of coral reef health in Indonesia and can also be applied across the tropical Indo-Pacific to support coral reef conservation and management. KW - Coral reef monitoring KW - Ecological health KW - Fishing pressure KW - Habitat heterogeneity KW - Water quality U2 - 10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 DO - 10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 M3 - Article AN - SCOPUS:105038100034 SN - 1015-1621 VL - 88 JO - Aquatic Sciences JF - Aquatic Sciences IS - 3 M1 - 75 ER - 
 
 
 
 Hadiyanto H, Vimono IB, Cappenberg HAW, Aji LP, Triandiza T, Setyastuti A et al. A new ecological index for assessing benthic invertebrate assemblages in tropical coral reef ecosystems . Aquatic Sciences . 2026 Jul;88(3):75. doi: 10.1007/s00027-026-01307-1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Powered by Pure Link opens in a new tab , Scopus Link opens in a new tab & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine&trade; Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 All content on this site: Copyright &copy; 2026 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research, its licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply
 
 We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to the use of cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Portal - Wageningen University & Research data protection policy Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 About web accessibility Link opens in a new tab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Report vulnerability Link opens in a new tab