Wetland ecosystem flourishes the biodiversity, local livelihood, and economy. However, the tourism activity in wetland can alter the ecosystem degradation. Thence, this study examines the psychological relationship of tourist recreational experience (TRE) on tourist satisfaction and environmentally responsible behavior (ERB). The tourist satisfaction (TS), meanwhile, was utilized as a mediator between TRE and ERB. The assessment was conducted through Stimulus-OrganismResponse (SOR) theory lens in Pong wetland Himachal Pradesh, India. The quantitative method was administered by using partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) for data analysis. The questionnaires were employed collecting 219 valid data among domestic tourists at Pong wetland region. Whereas, the internal consistency of all constructs was assessed using Cronbach’s alpha and McDonald’s ω, with each construct scoring above 0.7. While, the overall Cronbach’s alpha and McDonald’s ω values were 0.967 and 0.969, respectively. The results indicated that recreational experiences significantly enhance satisfaction and positively predict environmentally responsible behavior. However, there was an unexpected negative direct effect of tourist recreational experience toward environmentally responsible behavior. This indicates that the hedonic recreational experiences may not straightaway translate into commitment to the environment without the mediating role of tourist satisfaction. The findings shed light on experience-satisfaction-behavior correlations in wetland tourism. Noting that, solely of the wetland recreational value has no psychologically impact on environmentally responsible behavior. Therefore, the destination management organization should project on nurturing the conservation activities that enhance visitor satisfaction. As such, the creation and design of nature-based recreation that satisfying, inspiring and mastering awareness on environmental conservation while establishing sustainable wetland governance. In addition to this, the local community participation in wetland management should be prioritized.