TYPE Correction
PUBLISHED 17 September 2026
DOI 10.3389/ftox.2026.1988528
Correction: Chronic exposure to 
mining-contaminated borehole 
water impairs the entire male 
reproductive axis: partial 
mitigation by alpha-lipoic acid in 
Wistar rats
Festus Toochukwu Okposhi1, Collins Nduka Esomchi2*, 
Kenneth Tochukwu Onwe1, Leslie Ogechi Onumajuru1, 
Ernest Maduabuchi Omeje1, Favour Chioma Onwumere1, 
Precious Chidiogo Ugwu1, Goodness Emmanuella Onukogu1, 
Jennifer Obianuju Olisaeke1, Chinwendu Princess Victor1, 
Chiemerie Promise Omeh1 and Bianca Adanna Onele1
1Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, Alex Ekwueme Federal University Ndufu 
Alike, Ikwo, Ebonyi State, Nigeria, 2Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Basic Medical Sciences, 
State University of Medical and Applied Sciences, Igbo Eno, Enugu State, Nigeria
KEYWORDS
alpha-lipoic acid, borehole water, heavy metal contamination, HPG axis, male 
reproductive toxicity, oxidative stress
A Correction on 
Chronic exposure to mining-contaminated borehole water impairs the 
entire male reproductive axis: partial mitigation by alpha-lipoic acid in 
Wistar rats
by Okposhi FT, Esomchi CN, Onwe KT, Onumajuru LO, Omeje EM, Onwumere FC, Ugwu PC, 
Onukogu GE, Olisaeke JO, Victor CP, Omeh CP and Onele BA (2026). Front. Toxicol. 8:1899884. 
doi: 10.3389/ftox.2026.1899884
There was a mistake in the captions of Figures 2, 3, and 4 as published. The annotation 
keys for the hypothalamic, pituitary, and testicular photomicrographs were omitted. In 
addition, a production comment was incorporated into the published caption of Figure 4. 
The figures themselves are unchanged. The corrected captions appear below.
There was a mistake in the caption of Figure 2 as published. The annotation keys were 
omitted. The corrected caption of Figure 2 appears below.
“Figure 2 | Representative photomicrographs of the hypothalamus from the 
experimental groups: (A) Control, (B) Heavy Metal + Recovery, (C) ALA Only, (D) 
Post-Treatment, and (E) Pre-Treatment. H&E stain; ×400. Scale bar = 50 μm. Arrow, 
neuronal degeneration; arrowhead, cytoplasmic vacuolation.”
There was a mistake in the caption of Figure 3 as published. The annotation keys were 
omitted. The corrected caption of Figure 3 appears below.
OPEN ACCESS
APPROVED BY 
Frontiers Editorial Office, 
Frontiers Media SA, Switzerland
*CORRESPONDENCE 
Collins Nduka Esomchi, 
ndukakuee@gmail.com
RECEIVED 04 September 2026
ACCEPTED 07 September 2026
PUBLISHED 17 September 2026
CITATION 
Okposhi FT, Esomchi CN, Onwe KT, 
Onumajuru LO, Omeje EM, 
Onwumere FC, Ugwu PC, Onukogu GE, 
Olisaeke JO, Victor CP, Omeh CP and 
Onele BA (2026) Correction: Chronic 
exposure to mining-contaminated 
borehole water impairs the entire male 
reproductive axis: partial mitigation by 
alpha-lipoic acid in Wistar rats. 
Front. Toxicol. 8:1988528. 
doi: 10.3389/ftox.2026.1988528
COPYRIGHT 
© 2026 Okposhi, Esomchi, Onwe, 
Onumajuru, Omeje, Onwumere, Ugwu, 
Onukogu, Olisaeke, Victor, Omeh and 
Onele. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). 
The use, distribution or reproduction in 
other forums is permitted, provided the 
original author(s) and the copyright 
owner(s) are credited and that the original 
publication in this journal is cited, in 
accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or 
reproduction is permitted which does not 
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Toxicology frontiersin.org01
“Figure 3 | Representative photomicrographs of the pituitary 
gland from the experimental groups: (A) Control, (B) Heavy Metal + 
Recovery, (C) ALA Only, (D) Post-Treatment, and (E) Pre- 
Treatment. H&E stain; ×400. Scale bar = 50 μm. Hollow arrow, 
reduced cellular density; green arrowhead, intercellular oedema; 
dark circle, densely packed endocrine cells; blue arrow, basophils; 
arrow, cellular degeneration; black arrowhead, vacuolation.”
There was a mistake in the caption of Figure 4 as published. The 
annotation keys were omitted, and a production comment was added 
to the caption. The corrected caption of Figure 4 appears below.
“Figure 4 | Representative photomicrographs of the testes from 
the experimental groups: (A) Control, (B) Heavy Metal + Recovery, 
(C) ALA Only, (D) Post-Treatment, and (E) Pre-Treatment. H&E 
stain; ×400. Scale bar = 50 μm. Black block, degeneration of 
seminiferous tubules; hollow star, loss of germinal epithelium; 
white arrowhead, cytoplasmic vacuolation; yellow arrowhead, 
interstitial tissue changes.”
The original version of this article has been updated.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Frontiers in Toxicology frontiersin.org02
Okposhi et al. 10.3389/ftox.2026.1988528