REVIEW ARTICLE
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-026-04870-4
Surbhi Kharwar and Zeba Parveen: shared first author equally.
  Vinod Kumar
winodkumar8@gmail.com
1 Phycology Research Lab, Department of Botany, University 
of Lucknow, Lucknow 226007, India
2 Department of Botany, Pt. Prithi Nath (PG) College 
(affiliated to CSJM University), Kanpur, 
Uttar Pradesh 208001, India
3 Department of Botany, Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi 221005, India
4 Department of Chemistry, Pt. Prithi Nath (PG) College 
(affiliated to CSJM University), Kanpur, 
Uttar Pradesh 208001, India
Abstract
Cyanobacteria, among the most ancient and versatile microorganisms on Earth, thrive across different aquatic ecosystems, 
ranging from freshwater to marine environments. In addition to being important producers of structurally diverse second -
ary metabolites, these photosynthetic prokaryotes are crucial to the global cycling of carbon and nitrogen. With their wide 
range of biological activities, such as antibacterial, antiviral, anticancer, and anti-inflammatory properties, cyanobacterial 
metabolites are attractive options for use in biotechnology and medicine. In addition, some cyanometabolites have toxic 
properties that affect aquatic ecosystems and present problems for human health and water quality. This dual significance 
for ecology and biomedicine emphasizes how crucial it is to do systematic research on cyanobacterial metabolites. The 
chemical diversity, biological roles, and biosynthetic origins of cyanobacterial secondary metabolites are summarized in 
this review, with a focus on their translational potential and ecological responsibilities. Innovative approaches for accel -
erating metabolite discovery and characterization are also covered, including recent developments in metabolite profiling, 
genome mining, and artificial intelligence (AI)-assisted biosynthetic gene cluster prediction. The present review integrate 
ecological, biochemical, and computational perspectives emphasizes the cyanobacteria is ongoing significance as sources 
of bioactive chemicals for environmental sustainability, pharmaceutical research, and biotechnology.
Keywords Artificial intelligence · Biological properties · Cyanobacteria · Cyanotoxins · Metabolites · Pharmaceuticals
Received: 21 November 2025 / Accepted: 2 May 2026 / Published online: 25 June 2026
© King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology 2026
Cyanobacteria as biochemical treasure troves: unveiling bioactive 
metabolites for pharmaceutical and global sustainability
Surbhi Kharwar1 · Zeba Parveen2 · Rahul Prasad Singh3 · Yashveer Gautam4 · Vinod Kumar2
cycles and the rise of aerobic life forms were made possible 
by these microbes essential contribution to the oxygenation 
of Earth’s atmosphere (Mazard et al. 2016; Singh et al. 
2016; Zhang et al. 2023). Cyanobacteria are still essential 
to the worldwide cycling of carbon and nitrogen today, and 
they are found in every possible habitats such as freshwater, 
marine, and terrestrial environments.
Cyanobacteria are oxygenic phototrophs, and their main 
pigment for photosynthetic activity is chlorophyll a (Khar-
war and Mishra 2020). They also have accessory pigments 
including phycocyanin, phycoerythrin, and carotenoids, 
which work together to improve light-harvesting efficiency 
and photoprotection (Solanki 2020; Kuczyńska et al. 2024; 
Minić 2021). From filamentous and heterocyst-forming 
taxa to unicellular and colonial forms, cyanobacteria have 
evolved into a vast variety of morphotypes during the course 
of evolution. They have been able to colonize an astound -
ing variety of ecological niches because to their structural 
and physiological diversity, including settings with high UV 
radiation, desiccation, poor light availability, nutrient con -
straint, and extreme temperatures (Rippka et al. 1974; Saw 
Introduction
Cyanobacteria, sometimes known as blue-green algae, are 
among the oldest and most ecologically important types of 
photosynthetic prokaryotes, having evolved over 3.5 billion 
years (Kharwar and Mishra 2024). Modern biogeochemical 
282 Page 2 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
et al. 2013; de la Rosa et al. 2024). Significantly, cyano -
bacteria exhibit adaptability by maintaining photosynthetic 
activity in environments that severely restrict the majority 
of light-dependent species (Foster et al. 2011; Maberly And 
Gontero 2022; Steunou et al. 2006; Velichko et al. 2021).
In addition to their ecological significance, cyanobacte -
ria are becoming more widely known for their extraordi -
nary metabolic adaptability (Dittmann et al. 2015; Singh 
et al. 2017; Baunach et al. 2024; Jeong et al. 2020). They 
promote the synthesis of a wide variety of primary and 
secondary metabolites because they are effective photo -
synthetic organisms with better solar-to-biomass conver -
sion efficiencies than many terrestrial plants (Ducat et al. 
2011; Kanno et al. 2017; Olowoyeye And Kanwar 2023). 
Secondary metabolites are important for ecological inter -
actions such as stress tolerance, metal chelation, signaling, 
symbiosis, and defense against grazers and competition, 
whereas primary metabolites are necessary for growth and 
cellular maintenance (Singh et al. 2017; Burja et al. 2001; 
Manikandan et al. 2022). These compounds are commonly 
synthesized through specialized biosynthetic gene clusters 
and encompass chemically diverse classes such as peptides, 
polyketides, alkaloids, terpenoids, fatty acids, polysaccha -
rides, and photoprotective pigments (Srivastava et al. 2022; 
Shih et al. 2013; Kehr and Dittmann 2015; Ahmad et al. 
2022).
Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites have a wide range 
of biological activities, such as antibacterial, antiviral, anti-
cancer, anti-inflammatory, and enzyme-inhibitory qualities, 
which has drawn ongoing attention from the biotechnol -
ogy and pharmaceutical industries (Singh et al. 2005, 2016; 
Ahmad and Singh 2024; De Obeso Fernandez Del Valle 
And Scheckhuber 2021; Tiwari And Tiwari 2020). At the 
same time, some cyanobacterial metabolites are strong poi-
sons that can cause toxic algal blooms and endanger aquatic 
ecosystems, drinking water quality, and individual health 
(Gupta et al. 2023; Pierobon et al. 2018; Li et al. 2014; 
Singh et al. 2023a, b, c; Campos And Vasconcelos 2010). 
Comprehensive research into the diversity, function, and 
control of cyanobacterial metabolites is crucial because of 
their dual nature, which has the potential to be both medici-
nal and ecologically hazardous (Yasin et al. 2021).
Many reviews of cyanobacterial metabolites have been 
conducted in recent decades, frequently concentrating on 
particular chemical classes (such toxins or peptides), spe -
cific biological activity, or well-researched taxa (Alves et al. 
2020; Cepoi 2024; Leao et al. 2012; Köcher et al. 2020; Li 
et al. 2020; Nawaz et al. 2023; Okeke et al. 2021; Osborne 
et al. 2007; Osborne And Shaw 2008; Welker and Döhren 
2006). There are still significant gaps in the knowledge con-
necting biosynthetic gene clusters to ecological function in 
natural environments, despite the thorough characterisation 
of cyanobacterial metabolites. In order to better understand 
metabolite diversity in understudied taxa and harsh settings, 
the majority of studies focus on laboratory-cultured strains 
and well-studied species. In order to translate the chemical 
variety of cyanobacteria into sustainable pharmacological 
and biotechnological uses, future research must integrate 
ecological and evolutionary frameworks with metabolo -
mics, genome mining, and AI-assisted prediction. The cur -
rent literature is still quite dispersed, with little synthesis 
across metabolite classes, ecological roles, biosynthetic 
pathways, and new technological developments, despite the 
fact that these investigations have yielded insightful infor -
mation. The analytical and conceptual framework available 
for cyanobacterial natural product research has also been 
significantly expanded by recent developments in metabo -
lite profiling, genome mining, and artificial intelligence (AI) 
-assisted biosynthesis pathway prediction, necessitating an 
updated and comprehensive reassessment.
In light of this, the current study attempts to give a 
comprehensive and multidisciplinary overview of cyano -
bacterial bioactive metabolites. This review provides an 
integrative approach, relating functional metabolite diver -
sity, biosynthetic gene cluster architecture, and ecological 
adaptation. The review specifically seeks to: (i) deliver an 
overview of the main classes of secondary metabolites pro-
duced by cyanobacteria and their biosynthesis origins; (ii) 
discuss the biological activities and ecological roles of these 
metabolites in a unified framework; and (iii) highlight new 
analytical, computational, and artificial intelligence (AI)-
assisted methods for metabolite discovery and characteriza-
tion. In order to promote future research and translational 
efforts in pharmaceutical development, biotechnology, and 
environmental sustainability, this review provides a thor -
ough and forward-looking synthesis.
Secondary metabolites produced by 
cyanobacteria
Non-ribosomal peptides synthase (NRPS), 
polyketides synthase (PKS), and hybrid PKS-NRPS 
pathway
NRPS and PKS are key enzymes involved in the biosyn -
thesis of secondary metabolites across diverse organisms 
(Shukla And Sharma 2024; Soohoo et al. 2024; Gademann 
And Portmann 2008; Li et al. 2020; Weber et al. 2015). 
These enzymes are characterized by at least three modu -
lar domains that facilitate chain elongation and molecular 
transformations (Ansari et al. 2004). Initially, the catalytic 
domain binds and activates the precursor substrate, which 
is then transferred to the carrier protein domain. The carrier 
Page 3 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
protein domain subsequently loads the growing PK or 
NRP chain, incorporating the activated precursors. Finally, 
another catalytic domain mediates bond formation between 
the growing chain and newly loaded building blocks. A 
key distinction between PKS and NRPS lies in their use of 
precursor molecules: PKS utilizes malonyl-CoA or methyl 
malonyl-CoA, whereas NRPS incorporates proteinogenic 
and non-proteinogenic amino acids as monomers. Multiple 
genes make to normal PKS. Each module in the genes is 
typically in charge of adding and processing a single com -
ponent in the developing chain. Each domain that makes up 
the modules catalyses one or a few chemical changes on the 
subunit. Protein sequences frequently contain these well-
characterized domains that are simple to identify. Modules 
inside NRPS are in charge of incorporating particular amino 
acids into peptide chains (Yang et al. 2022). These modules 
include both proteinogenic and nonproteinogenic amino 
acids and are composed of an adenylation domain, pepti -
dyl carrier domain, and condensation domain. The complex 
chemical structures created by further changes including 
N-methylation, epimerization, and cyclization of the amino 
acid backbone can also occur in other domains.
Interestingly, hybrid PKS-NRPS systems have also been 
identified, as capable of synthesizing complex compounds. 
Notably, toxins such as lyngbyatoxin, apratoxin, and aplys-
iatoxin are synthesized through PKS, NRPS, or hybrid PKS-
NRPS pathways. NRPS systems also produce lipopeptides, 
which are characterized by a lipid-linked peptide structure 
formed through the combination of a lipid tail and amino 
acids. For instance, Moorea producens synthesizes antil -
latoxin and carmabin, while Moorea bouillonii produces 
lyngbyabellin. These lipopeptides display diverse bioactivi-
ties, with carmabin exhibiting antimalarial properties, and 
antillatoxin and lyngbyabellin demonstrating potent neu -
rotoxic and cytotoxic effects. Moreover, siderophores are 
small, high-affinity iron-chelating molecules synthesized by 
NRPS are crucial for bacterial survival in iron-limited envi-
ronments. Since iron predominantly exists in an insoluble 
form, certain bacteria have evolved to secrete siderophores 
to enhance iron absorption, underscoring their critical role 
in microbial metabolism and adaptability.
Terpenoids
Terpenoids represent a diverse class of organic compounds 
that are abundantly distributed in cyanobacteria and algae 
(Hoshino 2024; Husain et al. 2024; Pattanaik And Lindberg 
2015; Vincent et al. 2023; Avalos et al. 2022; Gupta And 
Phulara 2021). They can be categorized into seven groups: 
hemiterpenoids, monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, diter -
penes, triterpenes, tetraterpenes, and polyterpenesbased 
on their structural foundation of five-carbon isoprene units 
(Keeling And Bohlmann 2012; Singh And Sharma 2015). 
Terpenes encompass a broad spectrum of natural products 
(Gershenzon And Dudareva 2007) and are synthesized by 
plants, fungi, and bacteria through two primary pathways: 
the mevalonate (MV A) pathway and the methylerythritol 
phosphate (MEP) pathway (Fig. 1) (Gao et al. 2016). These 
biosynthetic pathways utilize substrates such as acetyl-CoA 
or glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and pyruvate (Pattanaik And 
Lindberg 2015). While the MV A and MEP pathways often 
operate synergistically across various organisms, cyano -
bacteria predominantly rely on the MEP pathway, leverag -
ing substrates generated during photosynthesis (Lee et al. 
2017). This MEP pathway produces isomeric five-carbon 
compounds, specifically isopentyl pyrophosphate and 
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate, which are subsequently con -
densed into geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP), a crucial precur-
sor in terpene biosynthesis (Rautela and Kumar 2022). The 
versatile structure of GPP enables the production of numer-
ous terpenes, highlighting the significance of cyanobacteria 
as a source of diverse terpenoid compounds (Li et al. 2014; 
Noushahi et al. 2022; Randhir et al. 2020; Ruzicka 1953; 
Żymańczyk-Duda et al. 2022).
Terpenes play a crucial role in various cellular pro -
cesses essential for survival (Rogowska And Szakiel 
2020). They are involved in energy metabolism through 
ubiquinone, which acts as a key energy carrier during 
cellular respiration. Additionally, terpenes contribute 
to photosynthesis via compounds such as chlorophyll, 
carotenoids, and plastoquinone, while hopanoids are vital 
for maintaining cell membrane biosynthesis and stability 
(Belin et al. 2018; Nandagopal et al. 2021). Among the 
diverse array of terpene compounds, carotenoids derived 
from cyanobacteria are of significant commercial inter -
est due to their different applications. Notably, certain 
cyanobacterial species exhibit allelopathic properties, 
which inhibit the growth of neighboring cyanobacterial 
species, primarily attributed to the production of substan -
tial amounts of geranyl acetone (Fischer 1991; Li et al. 
2023).
Cyanobacterial terpenoids are involved in redox metabo-
lism, membrane integrity, and photosynthesis, among other 
vital cellular functions. Carotenoids reduce photooxidative 
damage to photosynthetic machinery by dissipating excess 
excitation energy and quenching reactive oxygen species 
(Sun et al. 2022; Zulfiqar et al. 2021). Hopanoids help 
make membranes stable and stiff, especially when they are 
stressed by the environment (Kulkarni et al. 2015). Addi-
tionally, some terpenoid derivatives have allelopathic prop-
erties that prevent the growth of rival microbes (Kumar et 
al. 2024; Khalifa et al. 2021).
282 Page 4 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Carotenoids
The tetraterpenoid pigments known as carotenoids are 
synthesised from units derived from isoprene and have 
a C40 polyene backbone with several conjugated double 
bonds that give them their antioxidant and light-absorbing 
qualities (Nisar et al. 2015; Armstrong et al. 1990; Liang 
et al. 2006; Manochkumar et al. 2022; Pereira et al. 
2021). These accessory pigments play a vital role in pho -
tosynthesis, absorbing light primarily in the 400 to 500 
nm range, with their spectral properties influenced by 
the number and arrangement of double bonds (Bramley 
Fig. 1 Diagrammatic illustration of 
terpenoid production in cyanobac-
teria. The isoprenoid precursors 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) 
and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate 
(DMAPP) are produced by the 
methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) 
route. The larger prenyl diphos-
phates (GPP, FPP, and GGPP) that 
result from the conversion of these 
intermediates are precursors to 
carotenoids and other isoprenoid-
derived metabolites that are 
involved in membrane function, 
photosynthesis, and photoprotec-
tion. RuBP ribulose-1,5-bisphos-
phate, 3-PGA 3-phosphoglyceric 
acid, Ac-CoA acetyl-CoA, AcAc 
CoA acetoacetyl-CoA, HMG-CoA 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA, MVAmevalonate, mevalon-
ate-5-phosphate, MVAPP meva 
lonate-5-pyrophosphate, G3P 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, 
DXP 1-deoxy-d-xylulose 5-phos-
phate, MEP methylerythritol-
4-phosphate, CDP-ME 4-(cytidine 
5′-diphospho)-2-C-methyl-d-
erythritol, CDPMEP 2-phospho-
4-(cytidine 5′-diphospho)-2-C-
methyl-d-erythritol, MEcPP 
2-C-methyl-d-erythritol 2,4-cyclo-
diphosphate, HMB-PP 4-hydroxy-
3-methylbut-2-enyldiphosphate, 
AtoB acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase, 
HMGS HMG-CoA synthase, 
HMGR HMG-CoA reductase, MK 
mevalonate kinase, PMK MV AP 
kinase, MV APP decarboxylase, 
DXS DXP synthase, DXR DXP 
reductoisomerase: IspD: CDP-ME 
cytidylyltransferase, IspE CDP-ME 
kinase, IspF MEC synthase, IspG 
HMBPP synthase, IspH HMBPP 
reductase, DMAPP dimethylal-
lyl diphosphate, IPP isopentenyl 
diphosphate, GPP geranyl diphos-
phate, FPP farnesyl diphosphate, 
GGPP geranylgeranyl diphosphate, 
IDI isopentenyl diphosphate isom-
erase, GPPS GPP synthase, FPPS 
FPP synthase, GGPPS GGPP 
synthase, TPS Terpene synthase
 
Page 5 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
And Mackenzie 1988; Solomons And Bulux 1993; Yuan 
et al. 2015). Two prominent carotenoids, beta-carotene, 
and echinenone, are particularly important within this 
group (Pagels et al. 2021). Other significant carotenoid 
compounds found in cyanobacteria and algae include 
astaxanthin, cryptoxanthin, zeaxanthin, canthaxanthin, 
and 30-hydroxyechinenone which can be synthesized 
by process depicted in Fig. 2 (Mochimaru et al. 2005; 
Shah et al. 2016; Singh et al. 2017). These carotenoids 
serve multiple functions, acting as colorants, precursors 
to visual pigments, and enhancing the antioxidant capac -
ity in plants and algae as well as in cyanobacteria (Khar -
war et al. 2022; Čmiková et al. 2024; Maschmeyer et al. 
2020). By scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS) and 
dissipating excess energy, these pigments protect the 
photosynthetic apparatus (Mohamed Abdoul-Latif et 
al. 2024). One of the most well researched carotenoids, 
β-carotene i.e., most biologically active form, leads to 
vitamin A derivatives like retinal and retinoic acid, which 
are critical for immune system function, cellular differen -
tiation, and vision in higher plants (Olson 1993; Seino et 
al. 2008). The ecological significance of cyanobacterial 
carotenoids and their prospective uses in biotechnologi -
cal, pharmacological, and nutraceutical sectors are high -
lighted by their functional variety (Varshney and Singh 
2013).
Sterols
Sterols play a crucial role in regulating membrane fluidity, a 
fundamental property that affects cellular function (Piironen 
et al. 2000; Silvestro et al. 2013; V olkman 2003). These 
compounds are synthesized as byproducts of isoprenoid 
biosynthesis. It has been reported that only few cyanobacte-
rial species have the genes necessary for sterol biosynthesis 
and can produce sterols. This suggests that sterol produc -
tion is limited to particular lineages rather than being a 
characteristic shared by all cyanobacteria (V olkman 2003). 
Cyanobacteria are capable of producing both saturated 
and unsaturated sterols, as noted by Kohlhase and Pohl 
(1988). The unsaturated sterols identified in cyanobacteria 
include cholesterol, chondrillasterol, stigmasterol, sitos -
terol, brassicasterol, campesterol, 22-dehydrocholesterol, 
24-ethyl-cholest-7-enol, 24-methyl-cholest-7-enol, 24-eth -
ylcholesta-2,5-dienol, and 24-ethylcholesta-5,7,22-trienol 
(Elsheikh And Eltanahy 2024; Forin et al. 1972; Levin 
And Bloch 1964; Nadal 1971; Paoletti et al. 1976; Perry 
et al. 1978; Reitz And Hamilton 1968; Seckbach And Ikan 
1972; Singh et al. 2017; de Souza and Nes 1968; Teshima 
And Kanazawa 1972). In contrast, several saturated sterols, 
including 4α-methylsterols, 5α-cholestan-3β-ol, 24-methyl-
5α-cholestan-3β-ol, and 24-ethyl-5α-cholestan-3β-ol, have 
been reported in cyanobacterial species such as Anabaena 
cylindrical, A. viguirei, A. solitaria, Nostoc carneum, Nodu-
laria harveyana , and Microcystis aeruginosa (Nishimura 
And Koyama 1977; Patterson 1971; Singh et al. 2017; de 
Souza and Nes 1968).
Procházková et al. ( 2017) reported sterol concentra -
tions of up to 2.25 mg/L in water containing cyanobacte -
rial blooms, highlighting the presence of these compounds 
in aquatic environments. The biosynthesis of isoprenoids, 
beginning with the building block isopentenyl diphosphate, 
leads to the production of various cyclic and acyclic com -
pounds, including the C30 oxygenated isoprenoid oxido -
squalene. Sterols are produced by a series of intracellular 
enzymatic processes in the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway 
(Fabris et al. 2014; V olkman 2003). As integral components 
of cell membranes, sterols play pivotal roles in numerous 
biochemical processes in eukaryotic cells, including the 
production of steroid hormones (Martin-Creuzburg And 
von Elert 2009). From a nutritional perspective, sterols are 
valuable dietary sources for aquacultured organisms, con -
tributing to their health and growth (Cardozo et al. 2007). 
Structurally, sterols confer membrane stability and integ -
rity due to their rigid fused ring system, which strengthens 
the membrane architecture. Studies have demonstrated that 
several cyanobacterial species actively participate in ste -
rol biosynthesis, facilitated by enzymes such as D24-sterol 
C-methyltransferase, sterol-C-5-desaturase, C-4 methyl 
Fernesyl-p hyophosphate
(FPP)
crtE
Geranylgeranyl
pyrophosphate( GGPP)
Phytoene
crtB
Zeta Carotene
crtP
crtI
Lycopene
crtQ
Beta-Carotene
 Alfa-Carotene
Zeaxanthin
Echinenone
ctrL-ecrtL-b
crtR
crtW/crtO
Fig. 2 Diagrammatic representation of steps involved in the production 
of carotene in cyanobacteria. Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate (GGPP), 
which is produced via the MEP route, is the starting point for the bio-
synthesis of carotene. GGPP condensation results in phytoene, that 
subsequently goes through a series of desaturations to yield lycopene 
and cyclization to yield β-carotene and other carotenoids that help in 
photosynthesis and photoprotection. crtE geranylgeranyl pyrophos -
phate synthase, crtB phytoene synthase, crtP phytoene desaturase, 
crtQ zeta-carotene desaturase, crtL lycopene beta cyclase, lycopene 
epsilon cyclase, cruA lycopene cyclase, crtO/crtW beta-carotene keto-
lase, crtR beta-carotene hydroxylase
 
282 Page 6 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
sterol oxidase, and sterol-C-methyltransferase (Kaneko and 
Tabata1997; Nes 2011). Although some cyanobacterial lin-
eages have been shown to include genes for sterol biosyn -
thesis, there is currently no experimental proof that sterol 
production occurs, suggesting that sterol biosynthesis is not 
a common trait of cyanobacteria.
Fatty acids
Fatty acids are among the most critical metabolites due to 
their central role in metabolic processes (Gago et al. 2011; 
Leão et al. 2023; Maltsev And Maltseva 2021). In cyanobac-
teria, polyunsaturated fatty acids contribute to membrane 
lipid composition and physiological adaptation, whereas 
in aquatic food webs these fatty acids function as essential 
nutrients for higher organisms (Hernando et al. 2022; Shiels 
et al. 2022; Djuricic And Calder 2021). As the primary con-
stituents of lipids, fatty acids, and alcohols give rise to a 
diverse array of fats, phospholipids, glycolipids, and waxes, 
with structural variation depending on their arrangement. 
Long-chain C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as arachi-
donic and eicosapentaenoic acids, have only been identified 
in few cyanobacterial species, but numerous cyanobacteria 
synthesize C18 fatty acids, such as linoleic and linolenic 
acids (Lopes et al. 2023; Singh et al. 2002). A notable study 
demonstrated that fatty acids present in the cell lysate of 
Microcystis effectively inhibited ion transport in the gills of 
Oreochromis mossambicus (Bury et al. 1998).
In cyanobacteria, fatty acid biosynthesis is driven by 
fatty acid synthase (FAS), which operates through the use 
of acyl carrier proteins (ACPs) as key co-factors (Froehlich 
et al. 1990; Liu et al. 2011; Kaczmarzyk And Fulda 2010; 
Kahn et al. 2023) (Fig. 3). This type II FAS complex pro -
duces fatty acids by utilizing freely dissociable ACPs, which 
subsequently serve as direct substrates for acyltransferases, 
facilitating the incorporation of fatty acids into membrane 
lipids (Elsheikh And Eltanahy 2024; Frentzen et al. 1983; 
Kaczmarzyk And Fulda 2010).
Research on the biological activities of fatty acids has 
demonstrated their potential as anticancer, antibiotic, anti -
fungal, and antiviral agents (Burja et al. 2001; El-Baz et al. 
2013; Arokiarajan et al. 2022; de Sousa Victor et al. 2020; 
Liao et al. 2023; Patel et al. 2023; Tonon et al. 2024). Among 
the various types of fatty acids, polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFAs) are of particular interest due to their well-docu -
mented health benefits and growing demand in the global 
market (Khan et al. 2024; Steinhoff et al. 2014; Nagarajan 
et al. 2021). PUFAs, characterized by the presence of two or 
more methylene-interrupted double bonds, are highly val -
ued from a nutraceutical perspective, given their association 
with numerous positive health outcomes. These fatty acids 
also exhibit significant biological activity, making them 
highly relevant for therapeutic interventions in cardiovas -
cular diseases and obesity-related conditions (Cardozo et 
al. 2007; Gogna et al. 2023; Lee et al. 2016). Furthermore, 
PUFAs play a crucial role in regulating essential cellular 
Citnnr
ate
Glycolysis 
Pyruvate
AcCoA
Malonyl-CoA
Malonyl-ACP fatty
acid
synth
esis 
Fattya cyl-
ACP
Free
fatty
acid
Membrane lipids
plsX
plsY
plsC
fabD
lipA
aas
Krebs 
Cycle
Fig.  3 The schematic diagram represents the biosynthesis pathway 
of fatty acid in cyanobacteria. The enzymes involved in the process 
encoded by different genes such as accABCD, multi-subunit acetyl-
CoA carboxylase; fabD, malonyl coenzyme A-acyl carrier protein 
transacylase; lipA, lipolytic enzyme; plsX, plsY, plsC, putative phos -
phate acyl-transferases
 
Page 7 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
processes such as oxygen and electron transport, membrane 
fluidity, and thermal adaptation (Cardozo et al. 2007; Funk 
2001). The multifaceted health benefits and biological func-
tions of PUFAs highlight their increasing importance in 
both medical and commercial applications.
Photoprotective/UV-screening compounds
Numerous photoprotective secondary metabolites that cya -
nobacteria produce aid in reducing UV radiation-induced 
damage (Balskus And Walsh 2010; Gao et al. 2021; Mishra 
et al. 2024; Pathak et al. 2020). The two most significant 
of these are scytonemin and mycosporine-like amino acids 
(MAAs) (Kumar et al. 2021). The biosynthesis of these 
compounds is influenced by a variety of environmental 
stimuli, such as variations in light intensity, UV radiation, 
nutrient limitations, and other forms of stress (Görünmek 
et al. 2024; Rastogi et al. 2010). Photoprotective substances 
like scytonemin and MAAs work in conjugation to protect 
cyanobacterial cells from UV light. By absorbing UV rays 
and releasing surplus energy as heat, MAAs stop reactive 
oxygen species from forming (Oren And Gunde-Cimerman 
2007; Whitehead And Hedges 2005; Rastogi et al. 2010). 
The extracellular sheath contains a pigment called scytone-
min, which acts as a passive UV-screening agent to lessen 
UV penetration into cells (Singh et al. 2008). When com -
bined, these substances offer protection against radiation-
induced damage both within and outside of cells.
MAAs, in particular, are small, hydrophilic, colourless 
intracellular molecules with potential to dissipate excess 
energy as heat, thus preventing the formation of toxic oxy -
gen radicals (Conde et al. 2000; Groniger And Hader 2000; 
Kageyama And Waditee-Sirisattha 2018; Oren And Gunde-
Cimerman 2007; Whitehead And Hedges 2005). These 
protective compounds play a crucial role in mitigating the 
damaging effects of radiation stress, and there is growing 
evidence that MAAs can also extend photoprotection to 
primary and secondary consumers when ingested (Bhatia et 
al. 2011; Helbling et al. 2002; Singh et al. 2021; Quintero-
Pacheco et al. 2024). The photoprotective role of MAAs 
highlights their ecological significance and potential appli -
cations in biotechnology and environmental protection. A 
discussion of cyanobacterial photoprotective compound 
categories and their roles have been elaborately described 
under different subheadings.
Mycosporine-like Amino Acids (MAAs)
MAAs are photoprotective substances produced by some 
cyanobacteria, algae, and other microbes. The cyclohexe -
none or cyclohexenimine chromophore is attached to amino 
acids or amino alcohol substituents to form MAAs, which 
are small, water-soluble secondary metabolites (Bhatia et 
al. 2011; Nowruziet al. 2020; Singh et al. 2008). Accord-
ing to several studies, MAAs are produced by a variety of 
cyanobacteria, rhodophyta, and other groups of microalgae 
(Carreto And Carignan 2011; Rastogi et al. 2015; Rastogi 
And Madamwar 2016; Sinha et al. 2007). Numerous work-
ers reported that these compounds have UV-range absorp -
tion maxima (Bhatia et al. 2011; Kannaujiya et al. 2014; 
Takano et al. 1979).
In cyanobacteria, MAA biosynthesis is carried out via 
enzymatic pathways connected to the pentose phosphate 
and shikimate pathways. Sedoheptulose-7-phosphate has 
been found to be a crucial precursor in the formation of the 
MAA chromophore (Rastogi et al. 2015). 3-Dehydroquinate 
is a precursor for molecules involved in the biosynthesis of 
MAAs in cyanobacteria and an intermediate in the shiki -
mate pathway (Favre-Bonvin et al. 1987). It is use in skin 
protection products like sunscreen and other non-biological 
materials like photo stabilizing additives in varnish, paint, 
and plastics. MAAs, which elicit protective reactions, are 
believed to have evolved from cyanobacteria and algae 
(Klisch and Häder 2008; Nakamura et al. 1982). Biosynthe-
sis of MAAs involves two key steps: first, reduction of car-
boxylic group of 3-dehydroquinate; second, methylation of 
hydroxyl group at C4, followed by attachment of one amino 
acid (forming mycosporine-glycine) or two amino acids or 
amino alcohols (Klisch and Häder 2008) (Fig. 4).
Strong evidence in favour of MAAs as photoprotec -
tive compounds comes from their high molar co-efficients 
UV-absorption maxima ranging from 310nm to 362nm, 
photostability in fresh and salt water in the presence of pho-
tosensitizers, and resistance to primarily abiotic stressors 
like pH, temperature, various solvents, and UVR (Now -
ruziet al. 2020; Shahidi And Zhong 2010; Whitehead And 
Hedges 2005). The species and the localization of the pig -
ments play a major role in the protection against UV-B 
toxicity offered by MAAs (Fig. 5). Several cyanobacteria 
with cytoplasmic MAAs have been found to provide sig -
nificant, but limited, protection (Fig. 5). Garcia-Pichel and 
Castenholz, (1993) found that only 10–26% of the photons 
are absorbed by the pigment when MAAs are located in the 
cytoplasm. Since MAAs are found in the extracellular gly -
can in the Nostoc commune, it is believed that they play a 
significant role in photoprotection. According to Böhm et al. 
(1995), two out of every three photons that enter a cell are 
absorbed by pigments found in cell membranes or targets. 
Two UV A/B-absorbing pigments in N. commune were found 
to be present in colonies when exposed to high solar radia -
tion (Ferroni et al. 2010; Scherer et al. 1988). These pig -
ments, with absorption maxima at 312 and 335 nm, include 
one of the earliest identified mycosporines found within the 
282 Page 8 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
N
H
HN O
NH
O
N
O
HO
NH
OHO
O
O N
H
O
O
H
N
OH
HO
O
N
H
O
N
N
OH
OH
O
NH
NH
O
HO
SCYTONEMIN A
HO
N
O
N
O OH
OXIDIZED SCYTONEMIN
O
HO
N
H
O
OH
O
O
H
N
O
O
TETRAMETHOXYSCYTONEMIN
N
O
OHN
HO
O
SCYTONEMIN
O
HO
N
H
HO
O
H
N
O
O
DIMETHOXYSCYTONEMIN
O
N
N
S
KALKITOXIN
OH
OH2N
HN
O
N
OH
SCYTONEMIN-3A-IMINE
OH
H
O
NH
HN
OH3CO
H3CO
O
SCYTONINE
O
N
OO H
HO
HO
NH
O
OH
MYCOSPORINE-2-GLYCINE
O
O
HO
HO
NH
O
OH
MYCOSPORINE-GLYCINE
Fig. 5 Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites from several metabolite 
classes are displayed with their representative chemical structures. The 
structures show the variety of chemical structure cyanometabolites, 
which includes terpenoids, alkaloids, polyketides, peptides, and other 
bioactive substances
 
Fig. 4 The diagram shows the 
different routes for biosynthesis of 
MAAs in cyanobacteria
 
Page 9 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
extracellular glycan, where it is covalently bound to oli -
gosaccharides (Böhm et al. 1995; Hill et al. 1994). These 
compounds effectively dissipate absorbed UV radiation as 
heat, preventing the formation of harmful reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) (Conde et al. 2000). Furthermore, MAAs not 
only protects their primary producers but also extend photo-
protection to primary and secondary consumers within the 
food chain, shielding them from UVR (Helbling et al. 2002). 
The synthesis of MAAs is intricately linked to the photo -
synthetic process. This was demonstrated by the inhibition 
of MAA biosynthesis in the alga Alexandrium excavatum 
when treated with 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea 
(DCMU), a photosynthesis inhibitor, suggesting a direct 
connection between photosynthesis and MAA production.
Scytonemin
Scytonemin, a photoprotective compound with a molecu -
lar weight of 544 Da, is a dimeric structure composed of 
phenolic and indolic subunits (Fig. 5). Initially identified as 
a yellowish-brown, lipid-soluble pigment within the exo -
polysaccharide sheath of various terrestrial cyanobacteria 
(Garcia-Pichel And Castenholz 1991; Nowruziet al. 2020; 
Pathak et al. 2020; Rastogi et al. 2015; Rothrock and Gar -
cia-Pichel 2005; Wada et al. 2013). This compound exists 
in three distinct forms: the commonly found oxidized green 
form, a reduced red variant known as fuscorhodin, and an 
oxidized yellow variant termed fuscochlorin (Garcia-Pichel 
And Castenholz 1991; Wada et al. 2013). Recent investiga-
tions have also isolated additional scytonemin derivatives, 
including dimethoxy scytonemin, tetramethoxy scytone -
min, and scytonemin pigments, from organic extracts of 
Scytonema (Bultel-Poncé et al. 2004; Grant And Louda 
2013; Rastogi et al. 2014). The absorbance spectrum of 
scytonemin indicates that the live-cell variant exhibits peak 
absorption at 370 nm, while purified scytonemin absorbs 
most effectively at 386nm. Notably, it also demonstrates 
substantial absorbance at 252, 278, and 300nm, which likely 
contributes to its protective role in helping cyanobacteria 
to withstand the damaging effect of UV radiation. Several 
researches have shown that scytonemin alone can signifi -
cantly mitigate the risks associated with exposure to the 
most harmful UV-C radiation (Dillon And Castenholz 1999; 
Rastogi et al. 2013).
Scytonemin has been shown to significantly mitigate 
both the photobleaching of chlorophyll a and the inhibition 
of photosynthesis induced by UV-A radiation (Cockell And 
Knowland 1999; Gao and Garcia-Pichel 2011; Nowruziet 
al. 2020). This photoprotective capability is exemplified 
in Chlorogloeopsis sp., where scytonemin functions effec -
tively as a UV sunscreen (Garcia-Pichel et al. 1992; Port-
wich and Garcia-Pichel 2003). Unlike other UV protective 
mechanisms, which rely on the active repair of damaged 
cellular components and may fail after extended periods 
of physiological inactivity, scytonemin exhibits stability 
in response to various stressors, including UV radiation 
and temperature fluctuations. This stability allows scyto -
nemin to perform its screening activity without necessitat -
ing additional metabolic responses. Moreover, the superior 
UV screening potential of scytonemin suggests its poten -
tial application as a natural sunscreen in human cosmetics, 
highlighting its dual role as both a protective agent in cya -
nobacterial physiology and a promising ingredient for pho -
toprotection in cosmetic formulations (Nowruziet al. 2020; 
Rastogi et al. 2010). Figure 5 represents different types of 
scytonemin reported in cyanobacteria.
Halogenated substances
Halogenated compounds, often mistakenly believed to 
be solely anthropogenic, have been widely isolated from 
marine algae, particularly brown and red algae. These com-
pounds, including acetogenins, phenols, terpenes, indoles, 
fatty acids, and volatile halogenated substances such as 
dibromomethane, chloroform, and bromoform (Butler And 
Carter-Franklin 2004), are also prevalent across cyanobac -
teria and various other group of algae. Their pharmacologi-
cal significance is underscored by their diverse biological 
activities, which include antiproliferative, antifungal, anti -
bacterial, antiviral, antifeedant, antifouling, anti-inflamma -
tory, cytotoxic, ichthyotoxic, insecticidal, and antitumoral 
properties (Cabrita et al. 2010; Vairappan et al. 2001). Addi-
tionally, bioactive peptides like aeruginosin and cyanopep -
tolin, recognized as potent protease inhibitors, have been 
extensively documented in numerous cyanobacteria, offer -
ing promising applications in both agrochemistry and phar-
maceutical development (Silva-Stenico et al. 2011).
Phytohormones
Auxins such as indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), gibberellins 
(GA), cytokinins (CKs), and ethylene (ET), key regulators 
of plant growth and development, have been extensively 
documented to accumulate and be released by various cya -
nobacterial and algal genera (Gayathri et al. 2015; Hussain 
And Hasnain 2012; Stirk et al. 2002). Symbiotic cyano -
bacteria, notably through the excretion of phytohormones 
such as IAA and CKs, significantly contribute to host plant 
growth and development (Hussain And Hasnain 2011). A 
pivotal study by Hussain et al ( 2013) revealed that endo -
phytic Nostoc strains produce comparable levels of IAA and 
CKs in the root cells of both rice and wheat. The ipt (isopen-
tenyltransferase) gene catalyzes the transfer of isopentenyl 
groups to adenine nucleotides, which directly contributes 
282 Page 10 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
to the production of cytokines. Indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) 
biosynthesis does not directly include the ipt gene, despite 
the fact that cytokinins can affect physiological processes 
related to auxins. Gene knockout experiments resulted in a 
marked reduction of CKs and IAA due to the deactivation 
of the ipt gene, which occurred via homologous recombina-
tion. This genetic modification led to a significant decline 
in zeatin production, followed by a pronounced reduction 
in the growth of the mutant strain. Additionally, numerous 
plant growth regulators (PGRs), including amino acids, sug-
ars, and vitamins, have been isolated from various cyano -
bacterial and algal genera, which may further enhance the 
growth of vascular plants (Karthikeyan et al. 2007; Misra 
And Kaushik 1989).
Cyanotoxins
Marine and freshwater cyanobacteria as well as algae are 
known to produce array of toxins, classified as secondary 
metabolites. Certain cyanobacterial species produce bio -
logically active secondary metabolites called cyanotoxins, 
which can be harmful to aquatic habitats, humans, and ani -
mals. These substances are usually categorized as hepato -
toxins, neurotoxins, cytotoxins, and dermatotoxins based 
on their main physiological targets. The synthesis of cya -
notoxins is frequently linked to toxic algal blooms that are 
brought on by eutrophication, temperature fluctuations, and 
nutritional imbalance. From an ecological point of view, 
cyanotoxins might serve as competitive agents or chemical 
defense molecules, but from a public health standpoint, they 
are important environmental pollutants that have an impact 
on aquatic food webs and drinking water safety. Hepatotox-
ins represent one of the most extensively studied groups of 
cyanotoxins due to their severe effects on liver function. The 
most prominent hepatotoxins, including microcystins and 
nodularins, primarily target protein phosphatases (PP1 and 
PP2A), leading to disruption of cytoskeletal organization, 
oxidative stress, and hepatocyte damage. Because these tox-
ins can bioaccumulate in aquatic food chains and contami -
nate drinking water sources, they are of particular concern 
in environmental toxicology and public health monitoring.
The formation of harmful algal blooms, driven by nutri -
ent overloads such as nitrogen and phosphorus, significantly 
degrades water quality and leads to the release of various 
toxins (Codd et al. 2005). Among the five primary groups 
of cyanobacterial and algal toxins, neurotoxins such as ana-
toxins and saxitoxins are particularly notable. Other toxins 
of serious concern, due to their adverse effects on human 
health, include cytotoxins (e.g., cylindrospermopsin), hepa-
totoxins (e.g., nodularin and microcystins), dermatoxins, 
and irritant toxins such as lipopolysaccharides (Gácsi et 
al. 2009; Wiegand And Pflugmacher 2005). These toxic 
compounds pose significant threats to both ecological sys -
tem and public health, warranting focused attention on their 
regulation and mitigation.
Cyanobacteria such as Anabaena, Microcystis, Nostoc, 
and Oscillatoria have been identified as primary sources 
of potent toxins, including cylindrospermopsin, microcys -
tins, and saxitoxins (Codd et al. 2005; Lalić 2024; Lei et al. 
2024). Another notable toxin, cylindrospermopsin, an alka-
loid is produced by Aphanizomenon ovalisporum strains in 
Australia and Israel (Valério et al. 2005). Toxins produced 
by Anabaena, Umezakia natans , and Cylindrospermopsis 
raciborskii, found in Japan, Australia, and the United States, 
respectively, further exemplify the global distribution of 
these harmful compounds (Neumann et al. 2007; Törökné 
et al. 2004). Among cyanobacterial neurotoxins, three major 
classes are particularly concerning: (i) anatoxin-a, the first 
identified and highly potent cyanotoxin (Koskinen And 
Rapoport 1985); (ii) saxitoxin, produced by Anabaena cir-
cinalis in Australia and Aphanizomenon flos-aquae in North 
America, which has been linked to widespread animal fatal-
ities (Mahmood And Carmichael 1986); and (iii) anatoxin-
a(s), a potent irreversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor 
(Devic et al. 2002). These toxins render water unsafe for 
consumption and have detrimental effects on herbivorous 
zooplankton populations (Hansson et al. 2007), posing sig-
nificant public health risks (Stewart et al. 2006). Of the five 
major toxin groups, hepatotoxins and neurotoxins are the 
most dangerous to humans and animals due to their bioac -
cumulation in the liver and kidneys, respectively (Wiegand 
And Pflugmacher 2005).
Cyanobacterial toxins use specific molecular targets to 
achieve their biological effects. The inhibition of serine/
threonine protein phosphatases such as PP1 and PP2A by 
hepatotoxic microcystins and nodularins results in oxida -
tive stress, hepatocyte injury, and cytoskeletal disruption 
(Compos And Vasconcelos, 2010). While anatoxin-a func -
tions as a strong agonist of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, 
resulting in neuromuscular dysfunction, neurotoxins like 
saxitoxin interfere with the transmission of neural signals 
by blocking voltage-gated sodium channels (Florczyk et al. 
2014; Grishin 2005). Cylindrospermopsin mainly causes 
oxidative stress and inhibits the production of proteins 
in the tissues of the liver and kidneys (Sieroslawska And 
Rymuszka 2015). These mechanistic revelations emphasize 
the ecological function of cyanotoxins in chemical defense 
as well as its applicability to environmental monitoring and 
toxicity.
Siderophore
The ability to chelate iron is a common property in both 
freshwater and marine cyanobacteria, and some of these 
Page 11 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
chelators also operate as siderophores (siderous = iron; pho-
rus = bearer) (Kerry et al. 2008; Rastogi and Sinha 2009). 
In situations of iron stress, bacteria release siderophores, 
which are low molecular weight, high affinity Fe(III)-bind -
ing ligands that scavenge and transport iron. It has also been 
demonstrated that, in iron-limiting condition, cyanobacteria 
can make siderophores, which are low-molecular-weight 
(400–1200 Da) ferric-specific chelators (Wilhelm And Trick 
1994). When there is an iron shortage, siderophores attach 
to Fe3+ to create a ferrisiderophore complex, which makes 
it easier for ferric ions to enter cells (Matzanke 1991). Ana-
baena PCC 7120 was the first to be identified as the source 
of Schizokinen, a citrate derivative siderophore (Goldman 
et al. 1983). Synechococcus PCC 7002 has yielded syn -
echobactins, which are thought to be schizokinen deriva -
tives. They function as siderophores and have one of the 
hydroxamic acids substituted with a long fatty acid (Ito And 
Butler 2005). The biofilm-forming cyanobacterium, Ana-
baena cylindrica 1403-2a was the source of two complex 
siderophores, anachelin H with a terminal salicylamide and 
anachelin 1, ended by an oxazoline ring (Beiderbeck et al. 
2000). Siderophores are particularly intriguing as potential 
medications for use in the fields of biomaterials and bio -
sensors (Gademann et al. 2009), as well as in the treatment 
of iron overload and acute and chronic metal toxicity (Nei -
lands 1981).
Ribosomally synthesized and post-
translationally modified peptides
Ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modi -
fied peptides (RiPPs) represent a diverse class of secondary 
metabolites that undergo significant structural modifications 
after ribosomal synthesis. These post-translational modifi -
cations (PTMs) include leader peptide hydrolysis, cycliza -
tion, and the formation of disulfide bonds, among others. 
The biosynthetic gene clusters responsible for RiPP synthe-
sis typically encode a short precursor peptide, characterized 
by an N-terminal leader sequence and a C-terminal core 
sequence, alongside PTM enzymes that are essential for 
structural diversification (Arnison et al. 2013; Montalbán-
López et al. 2021). PTM enzymes act on linear precursor 
peptides, introducing various modifications that yield func-
tionally diverse and structurally complex mature peptides. 
RiPPs were previously categorized into subgroups such 
as lanthipeptides, lasso peptides, microviridins, cyanobac -
tins, and microcins. However, they are now unified under 
the RiPP classification due to their shared biosynthetic 
mechanisms. These compounds exhibit range of biological 
activities, including protease inhibition, cytotoxicity, sig -
nalling, anticancer properties, and even resistance to human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Arnison et al. 2013). For 
instance, microviridin, initially isolated from Microcys-
tis viridis, acts as a potent serine protease inhibitor, while 
patelamide A, produced by Prochloron didemni , demon -
strates its cytotoxic effects (Schmidt et al. 2005). These 
bioactive properties highlight the pharmaceutical potential 
of RiPPs, underscoring their importance in drug discovery 
and therapeutic development. Enzymatic tailoring produces 
structurally restricted compounds with high target selectiv -
ity from ribosomally produced and RiPPs. In contrast to 
cyanobactins, which demonstrate cytotoxic or antibacterial 
activity by membrane contact or enzyme inhibition (Khan 
And Phan 2025), microviridins serve as serine protease 
inhibitors by attaching to the catalytic site of target enzymes 
(Weiz et al. 2011). Following enzymatic cyclization, meth -
ylation, and oxidation events that influence biological activ-
ity, the biosynthesis of RiPPs entails precursor peptides 
encoded in biosynthetic gene clusters (Han And Won 2024).
Cyclic peptide
Cyclic peptides, distinctive class of natural products that are 
known for their structural diversity and extensive pharma -
cological applications. Over the past two decades, numerous 
cyclic peptides have been isolated from marine cyanobacte-
ria, revealing novel scaffolds, halogenated molecules, and 
intricate spatial configurations (Tan 2007). These discover-
ies highlight the underexplored chemical diversity of cya -
nobacteria as a rich source of bioactive compounds. Among 
the most extensively studied hepatotoxins are microcys -
tins and nodularins (Ferrão-Filho And Kozlowsky-Suzuki 
2011). Microcystins, originally isolated from the cyano -
bacterium, Microcystis aeruginosa, have also been detected 
in other cyanobacterial genera (Buratti et al. 2017). Micro-
cystins are characterized by a cyclic heptapeptide structure, 
which includes seven amino acids. A hallmark of their struc-
ture is the presence of the unique 3-amino-9-methoxy-2,6,8-
trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6-dienoic acid moiety (ADDA) 
which plays a critical role in their bioactivity. These toxins 
have significant implications for human and animal health 
due to their potent hepatotoxic properties. The structural 
complexity and bioactivity of cyanobacterial cyclic peptides 
underscore their significance in drug discovery, environ -
mental monitoring, and toxicology, making them a crucial 
subject of study in natural product research.
The genera responsible for producing microcystins 
include Microcystis, Planktothrix, and Dolichospermum, 
while the nodularin (cyanotoxin) is predominantly produced 
by Nodularia sp. Cryptophycin-1, initially separated from 
the cyanobacterium, Nostoc sp. for its antifungal properties, 
was later re-isolated in 1992 from another Nostoc sp. (GSV 
224) as an anticancer agent (Liang et al. 2005). Numerous 
282 Page 12 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
cryptophycin analogues have been discovered, both natu -
rally and through chemical synthesis. Notably, cryptophy -
cin-52 (LY355073) advanced to phase 2 clinical trials for 
treating platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Apratoxins A-G, 
a class of cyclic lipopeptides isolated from the marine cya -
nobacterium Lyngbya sp., exhibit potent cytotoxic activity 
(Gutiérrez et al. 2008; Luesch et al. 2001). Apratoxin A 
demonstrated high cytotoxicity in vitro, with IC50 values of 
0.52 nM against KB cells and 0.36 nM against Lovo cancer 
cells. Key structural features contributing to its cytotoxic -
ity include hydroxyl groups and N-methylated isoleucine at 
C-35. Comparatively, apratoxin analogues B and C showed 
reduced cytotoxicity. Apratoxin D exhibited an IC 50 value 
of 2.6 nM against H-460 human lung cancer cells, which 
matched the potency of apratoxin A. Apratoxins F and G 
displayed cytotoxic activity against H-460 cells with IC 50 
values of 2 nM and 14 nM, respectively. Further research 
on the cyanobacterium, Moorea bouillonii, collected from 
the northern coast of New Britain, Papua New Guinea, led 
to the discovery of a novel cytotoxic cyclic depsipeptide 
known as bouillonamide (Tan et al. 2013).
Cyanobacterial cyclic peptides have a variety of phar -
macological actions that are mediated by certain molecu -
lar targets. Protein phosphatases namely PP1 and PP2A are 
inhibited by microcystins (MacKintosh et al. 1990), whereas 
cryptophycins bind to tubulin and prevent mitosis, disrupt -
ing microtubule assembly (Smith and Zhang 1996). By pre-
venting co-translational translocation in the endoplasmic 
reticulum, apratoxins disrupt the secretory system, lowering 
growth factor signaling and triggering death (Qamar et al. 
2021). Cyclic peptides strong binding affinity and biological 
potency are a result of their structural rigidity and confor -
mational stability (Buchanan et al. 2025).
Acyclic peptides
Many cyanobacterial peptides that lack the cyclic backbone 
structure and are linear peptide metabolites called as acyclic 
peptides. These substances frequently have strong biologi -
cal activity despite having a simpler structural arrangement 
because they contain unusual amino acids and post-transla-
tional modifications. The potential of cyanobacteria-derived 
acyclic peptides as lead molecules in the development of 
anticancer drugs has been highlighted by their significant 
cytotoxic and antiproliferative characteristics. Dolastatin 
10, a potent cytotoxic peptide composed of rare amino 
acids, was originally discovered in the sea hare Dolabella 
auricularia (Pettit et al. 1987). Subsequent studies revealed 
its production by the marine cyanobacterium, Symploca sp. 
(Luesch et al. 2001). The synthetic analogue of dolastatin 
10, monomethyl auristatin E (MMAE), was conjugated with 
a chimeric human-murine IgG1 antibody to develop the 
antibody–drug conjugate brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris®) 
(Solanki 2020). This drug demonstrated significant efficacy 
against human colon adenocarcinoma and was granted Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) US approval in 2011, fol -
lowed by European approval in 2015 for the treatment of 
lymphomas (Rangel And Falkenberg 2015).
The urgent need for cyanobacterial 
metabolites as antivirus agents and current 
state of antivirus drugs
Cyanobacterial raw extracts and their secondary metabo -
lites have demonstrated significant potential in addressing 
various human health challenges. A range of techniques, 
including in silico, in vitro, and in vivo methods have been 
employed to identify and characterize their pharmacological 
properties. Over the past five decades, the global population 
has faced a considerable burden due to the absence of vac -
cines and effective treatments for several viral infections, 
including hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HIV . In particular, 
no specific drug candidates are currently available for treat-
ing certain viral infections, such as respiratory tract viruses 
like Herpes Simplex Viruses (HSV-1 and HSV-2). In the 
past 16 years, the United Nations Millennium Development 
Goals (UNMD) initiative has allocated financial resources 
to reduce the incidence of infectious diseases in low-income 
nations (Dye and O’Garra 2014). However, many existing 
antiviral drugs on the market are associated with adverse 
side effects, particularly when used to treat individuals 
infected with these viruses. This challenge has prompted 
researchers to explore novel natural antiviral solutions. 
Consequently, scientists are utilizing diverse approaches to 
extract bioactive compounds from cyanobacteria, aiming to 
discover promising new antiviral candidates (Ahmadi et al. 
2015).
Over the past two decades, researchers have employed 
various solvents such as water, methanol, and ethanol to 
extract secondary metabolites from cyanobacteria, aiming 
to discover novel antiviral compounds. Studies have indi -
cated that the efficacy of these antiviral compounds varies 
depending on the research focus and specific pharmacologi-
cal applications (Ahmadi et al. 2015; Sanmukh et al. 2014). 
Supporting this, Lau et al. ( 1993) demonstrated that cya -
nobacterial strains possess potent viral inhibitory activities, 
particularly against HIV and the avian myeloblastosis virus, 
by inhibiting reverse transcriptase activity (Tables 1, 2, and 
3).
Page 13 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Table 1 Metabolites synthesized by different groups of cyanobacteria and algae (adopted from Singh et al. 2017)
Metabolites Algae/cyanobacteria Uses References
Phenolic 
compounds
Arthrospira platensis
Nostoc muscorum, Phormidium foveolarum, 
Spirulina platensis
Prevents vascular damage as well as cardiovascular diseases progression
Provides defence by scavenging the free radicals
Acts as a UV-B screening compound
Provide resistance to plants against pathogens, pests, and diseases
Rice-Evans et al. 1997;
Singh et al. 2003;
La Camera et al. 2004;
V ogt 2010;
Ferrari et al. 2015;
Kumar et al. 2016;
Fatty acids Synechocystis sp.,
Anabaena,
Nostoc, Spirulina
Phaeodactylum tricornutum,
P . lutheri,
Nostoc commune
Provides chemical defence as it is toxic to grazers
Lipid extracts may be used as herbal medicine, to treat against cancer, 
viruses, burns, and chronic fatigue
Anupama And Ravindra 2000;
Jüttner 2001; Rasmussen et al. 2008;
Guedes et al. 2011; Hellier et al. 2013
Terpenoids Synechocystis sp. Provides chemical defenceagainst herbivory, fragrances, and flavours Kirby And Keasling 2009; Bentley et al. 2013
Mycospo-
rineglycine, 
Porphyra-334,
and Shinorine
Anabaena doliolum, Scytonema javanicum Acts as osmolytes and improves antioxidant status, which subsequently 
lowers the level of ROS
Oren and Gunde-Cimerman2007;
Klisch and Häder 2008; Singh et al. 2010
Carotenoids, 
β-Carotene, 
Lutein, Zeaxan-
thin, Cryptoxan-
thin, α-carotene, 
Lycopene
Nostoc muscorum, Phormidium foveolarum, Spi-
rulina platensis
Improve antioxidant status of the organisms
Use in food industry
Use to prevent cancer
Cardozo et al. 2007; Prasanna et al. 2010;
Kumar et al. 2016
Scytonemin Scytonema Pharmacological potential and used as anti-inflammatory and antiprolif-
erative agent
Stevenson et al. 2002
Carragenans, 
Agar, and 
Lectins
Chondrus ocellatus* Widely used as antitumor, antiviral, anticoagulant, and immunomodula-
tion agent
Marinho-Soriano And Bourret 2003;
Jepson et al. 2004;
Cardozo et al. 2007
Halogenated 
compounds
Synechococcus elongates PCC7942, Cylindro-
spermopsis raciborskii 339-T3, Fischerella,
Microcystis aeruginosa NPCD-1, Microcystis 
panniformis SCP702
Exhibit antiviral, antifungal, antifouling, antiproliferative, antibacterial, 
anti-inflammatory activity
Show cytotoxic, antifeedant, insecticidal, and ichthyotoxic responses
Blunt et al. 2009;
Rastogi and Sinha 2009; Silva-Stenico et al. 
2011
Phytohormones Anabaena vaginicola, Nostoc calcicola Enhanced the production of defence enzymes and provide protection 
against different stresses
Takahama et al. 2003; Tarakhovskaya et al. 
2007; Hashtroudi et al. 2013
Toxins Microcystis sp.,
Anabaena sp.,
Oscillatoria sp., Anabaenopsis sp.,
Nostoc sp.,
Hapalosiphon sp., Lyngbya polychroa
Used for development of biocides that serve as antibiotics, anticancerous, 
and anti-inflammatory agents with relevant to pharmaceutical activities
Burja et al. 2001;
Biondi et al. 2004;
Cardozo et al. 2007; Gunasekera et al. 2008
Organisms that are eukaryotic algae are represent with “*”mark
282 Page 14 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Table 2 Various phytohormones produced by cyanobacteria and algae and their potential implications in microbial biotechnology (adopted from Singh et al. 2017)
Phytohormones Cyanobacteria/algae Relevant findings in microalgae Potential 
implication 
for microalgal 
biotechnology
References
Abscisic acid 
(ABA)
Anabaena variabilis, Ascophyllum nodosum*, Chlam-
ydomonas reinhardtii*, Chlorella minutissima*, Chon-
dracanthus* sp., Coscinodiscus granii*, Draparnaldia 
mutabilis*, Dunaliella* sp., Gelidium* sp., Gracilaria* 
sp., Gracilariopsis* sp., Hypnea* sp., Nannochloropsis 
oceanic*, Nostoc muscorum, Porphyra* sp., Trichormus 
variabilis, Synechococcus leopoliensis
Exogenous ABA decreases growth rate in Nannochlo-
ropsis oceanica* and Coscinodiscus granii*
Exogenous ABA improves stress tolerance to dehydra-
tion in Haematococcus pluvialis*, higher salinity in 
Dunaliella sp.,* and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*; 
nitrogen deprivation in Nannochloropsis oceanica*; 
osmotic stress in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*
Improvement in 
stress tolerance
Boyer And Dougherty 1988; 
Hirsch et al. 1989; Kentzer and 
Mazur 1991; Zahradnıckova et al. 
1991; Marsšálek et al. 1992; Tom-
inaga et al. 1993; Kobayashi et 
al. 1997; Yoshida et al. 2003; Har-
tung 2010; Yokoya et al. 2010; Lu 
et al. 2014; Stirk et al. 2014
Auxins Anabaena sp., Chlorella minutissima*, Chlorella pyre-
noidosa*, Chondracanthus* sp., Chroococcidiopsis sp., 
Ectocarpus siliculosus*, Gelidium* sp., Gracilaria* sp., 
Gracilariopsis* sp., Hypnea* sp., Nostoc sp., Oscillatoria 
sp., Phormidium sp., Porphyra* sp., Prionitis lanceolate*, 
Scenedesmus armatus*, Synechocystis sp.
Exogenous indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) improves growth 
rate in C. reinhardtii*, Chlorella sorokiniana*, Chlorella 
vulgaris*, Haematococcus pluvialis*, Nostoc sp., 
Phaeodactylumtri
cornutum*, and Pleurochrysis carterae*, and oil content 
in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*, Haematococcus
pluvialis*, Phaeodactylumri
cornutum*
Elevation of 
microalgal 
growth rate, bio-
mass production, 
oil content, and 
stress tolerance
Ashen et al. 1999; Mazur et al. 
2001; Sergeeva et al. 2002; Bail 
et al. 2010; Hussain et al. 2013; 
Maor, 2012; Yokoya et al. 2010; 
Mazhar et al. 2013; Park et al. 
2013; Piotrowska-Niczyporuk 
And Bajguz 2014; Stirk et al. 
2014
Cytokinins (CK) Anabaena sp., Calothrix sp., Chlorella minutissima*, 
Chlorogloeopsis sp., Chondracanthus* sp., Chroococcidi-
opsis sp., Ecklonia* sp., Ecklonia maxima*, Gelidiums* 
sp., Gigartina clathrate*, Gracilaria* sp., Gracilariopsis* 
sp., Hypnea* sp., Laminaria pallid*, Nannochloropsis 
oceanic*, Oscillatoria sp., Phormidium sp., Porphyra* 
sp., Rhodospirillum* sp., Synechocystis sp.
Exogenous CK improves cell cycle progression in 
Nannochloropsis
oceanica*; growth rate in C. reinhardtii*, 
Nannochloropsis
oceanica*, and oil content in C. reinhardtii*, 
Haematococcus
pluvialis*, and Phaeodactylum tricornutum*
Elevated temperature led to increase in CK contents in 
Ecklonia maxima* and Macrocystis pyrifera*
Elevation of 
microalgal 
growth rate, oil 
content, and 
stress tolerance
Jennings1969; Tian et al. 2006; 
Tsavkelova et al. 2006;
Hussain et al. 2010;
Stirk et al. 2011; Park et al. 2013; 
Lu et al. 2014; Stirk et al. 2013, 
2014
Ethylene (ET) Anabaena sp., Calothrix sp., Chlorella pyrenoidosa*, 
Cylindrospermum sp., Ecklonia maxima*, Nostoc sp., 
Padina arborescent* sp., Porphyra tenera*, Scytonema 
sp., Synechococcus sp.
ET take part in programmed cell death of microalgae in 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*
Enhancement 
of microalgal 
growth rate as 
well as biomass 
productivity
Watanabe And Kondo 1976; Kre-
slavsky et al. 1997; Tsavkelova et 
al. 2006; Yordanova et al. 2010
Gibberellins 
(GA)
Anabaenopsis sp., Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*, 
Chlorella* sp., Cylindrospermum sp., Eckloniaradiate*, 
Hypnea musciformis*, Nannochloropsis oceanic*, Phor-
midium foveolarum
Exogenous GA stimulates astaxanthin biosynthesis in 
Haematococcus pluvialis* Exogenous GA improves 
growth rate in C. reinhardtii*
Increased algal 
growth rate 
and biomass 
productivity. 
Target chemical 
production
Jennings 1968; Gupta And Agar-
wal 1973; Tsavkelova et al. 2006; 
Park et al. 2013; Stirk et al. 2013; 
V oß et al. 2014
Organisms that are eukaryotic algae are represent with “*”mark
Page 15 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Table 3 An overview of cyanotoxins produced by cyanobacteria and algae and their potential impacts on other organisms (adopted from Singh et al. 2017)
Cyanotoxins Source Nature Effect References
Cylindrospermopsins 
(Hepatotoxic, nephrotoxic, 
and cytotoxic)
Anabaena, Aphanizomenon
ovalisporum, Umezakianatan, Raphidiopsis
curvata, and Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii
Guanidine alkaloid Inhibitor of protein biosynthesis, glutathione synthesis, impli-
cate cytochrome P-450, overexpression of DNA damage repair 
proteins genotoxic
Humpage et al. 2000; 
Neumann et al. 2007
Lyngbyatoxin Lyngbya majuscula, Oscillatoria, and Schizothrix Alkaloid Causes erythema (dermatitis), blisters, and necrosis in mam-
mals; potent tumor promoters
Fujiki et al. 1983; 
Taylor et al. 2014
Dermatotoxins 
Aplysiatoxins
Lyngbya, Schizothrix, Gracilaria coronopifolia*, 
and Oscillatoria
Alkaloid (phenolic 
bislactone)
Inflammatory agents, protein kinase C activators. Dilation of 
the lymphatic vessel and congestion of capillaries, diarrhoea, 
and Fibrin deposition in the dilated pulmonary artery followed 
by bleeding
Fujiki et al. 1983; 
Wiegand And Pflug-
macher 2005
Endotoxins 
Lipopolysacc-haride
All cyanobacteria Lipopolysaccharide Inflammatory agent, gastrointestinal irritants Stewart et al. 2006
Hepatotoxins Heptapeptide Planktothrix agardhii and P . rubescens - - Metcalf and Codd 
2012
Microcystins Anabaena, Anabaenopsis, Hapalosiphon, Micro-
cystis, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, and Planktothrix
Cyclic heptapeptide Inhibition of protein phosphatases (PP1 and PP2A) Dittmann And Wie-
gand 2006
Nodularin Nodularia Cyclic pentapeptide Inhibition of protein phosphatases (PP1 and PP2A) Bagu et al. 1997
Neurotoxins Anatoxin-a Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Cylindrospermum, 
Oscillatoria, Phormidium, and Rhaphidiopsis
Alkaloid Binds irreversibly to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors Namikoshi et al. 2003
Anatoxin-a (s) Anabaena, Microcystis, Nostoc, and Planktothrix Guanidine methyl Inhibits acetylcholinesterase activity Matsunaga et al. 1989
β-N-methylamino-Lalanine 
(BMAA)
Microcystis and Planktothrix Phosphate ester Causes disorder of Motor system, glutamate agonist, increasing 
the intracellular concentration of calcium in neurons and induc-
ing neuronal activity by hyperexcitation
Lobner et al. 2007
Cyanopeptolin Anabaena flos-aquae, and Anabaena 
lemmermanni
Transcriptional alterations of genes belonging to DNA damage 
and repair
Faltermann et al. 
2014
Saxitoxins Anabaena, Aphanizomenon, Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii, Lyngbya, and Planktothrix
Carbamate alkaloid Binds and blocks the sodium channels in neural cells Strichartz et al. 1986
Other toxins 
Debromoaplysitoxin
Lyngbya majuscule Polyacetates Tumor promoters Fujiki et al. 1983
Kalkitoxin Lyngbya majuscule Lipopeptide Block the sodium channels of nerve cell Edwards et al. 2004
Organisms that are eukaryotic algae are represent with “*”mark
282 Page 16 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Cyanobacterial metabolites and its antiviral 
potential
Cyanobacterial metabolites work against viruses via a vari-
ety of different molecular pathways. Inhibiting viral entry 
by attaching to glycoproteins on viral envelopes or host cell 
receptors, several cyanobacterial lectins and sulfated poly -
saccharides stop virus–cell adhesion and membrane fusion. 
Viral entrance into host cells is prevented, for instance, by 
cyanovirin-N strong affinity for high-mannose oligosac -
charides on viral envelope proteins. Other cyanobacterial 
metabolites affect viral protein synthesis, destabilize viral 
capsid structures, or limit reverse transcriptase function, all 
of which hinder viral replication. When compared to tra -
ditional small-molecule antivirals, these mechanisms make 
cyanobacterial metabolites especially appealing as antiviral 
options since they target the early stages of infection and 
may lessen the chance of resistance development. For the 
past two decades, the search for novel antiviral drug can -
didates has increasingly focused on cyanobacteria, par -
ticularly for combating various viral infections, including 
coronaviruses (Shalaby And Dubey 2018; Zainuddin et al. 
2007). Cyanobacteria and algae are known to produce lec -
tins, naturally occurring proteins with significant antiviral 
properties. These lectins have demonstrated strong antiviral 
activity against viruses like Ebola, SARS, and HIV . Study 
reported by Huskens and Schols (2012), HIV and HSV were 
used as test models to evaluate antiviral efficacy, and lectins 
showed inhibitory capacity against both viruses. Moreover, 
several cyanobacterial metabolites such as cyanovirin-N, 
phycobiliprotein, calcium spirulan, allophycocyanin, nos -
toflan, dolastatin-3, ichthyopeptins A/B, microvirin, and 
lipoproteins exhibit a broad spectrum of antiviral poten -
tial. These compounds act by preventing viral entry into 
epithelial cells of the urogenital tract or by demonstrating 
virustatic or virucidal activity. Table 4 provides a detailed 
overview of these metabolites, their respective cyanobacte-
rial sources, and their specific antiviral effects.
The antiviral properties of cyanobacterial 
polysaccharides
Cyanobacteria have emerged as a pivotal source for antivi -
ral agents, with their active components showing significant 
potential in combating viral infections. Reichert et al (2017) 
investigated the antiviral properties of Arthrospira platen-
sis polysaccharides, using the supernatant to test its effects 
on Koi Herpes Virus (KHV), further validating the role of 
cyanobacteria in antiviral research. Influenza viruses, which 
cause seasonal epidemics primarily affecting the respira -
tory system, are responsible for severe health complications 
such as pneumonia, pulmonary disease, and cardiovascular 
issues. Despite the global spread of these viruses, only a 
limited number of cyanobacterial exopolysaccharides have 
shown promising effect in prevention and treatment of influ-
enza and pneumonia viral infections.
Nostoflan, an acidic polysaccharide extracted from Nos-
toc flagelliforme, shows notable antiviral properties, partic-
ularly against viruses that utilize carbohydrates as cellular 
receptors (Whitton And Potts 2007). A study conducted in 
1997 highlighted the antiviral efficacy of calcium spiru -
lina, derived from hot water extracts of Spirulina platensis, 
against herpes simplex virus (HSV), human immunodefi -
ciency virus type 1 (HIV-1), and human syncytium-forming 
virus (HSP1). Even at lower dosages, calcium spirulina 
effectively inhibits viral entry into host cells and the forma-
tion of syncytia (Hernández-Corona et al. 2002). Further-
more, its antiviral activity extends to enveloped viruses, 
with significant effects observed against influenza A virus 
(IA V) (Ahmadi et al. 2015; Kanekiyo et al. 2007). Simi -
larly, the cyanobacterium, Aphanothece halophytica is rich 
in sulfated exopolysaccharides comprising a diverse array 
of sugars, including arabinose, rhamnose, fucose, man -
nose, glucose, galactose, glucuronic acid, and sulfuric acid 
(Kumari et al. 2020). These compounds have shown prom-
ising effects as therapeutic agents in murine models of pneu-
monia, exhibiting not only antiviral properties but also the 
ability to mitigate immune system degeneration in affected 
mice.
Cyanobacterial polysaccharides mainly work with host 
cell receptors and viral envelope proteins to produce anti -
viral and immunomodulatory effects (Wu et al. 2020). By 
imitating host cell surface glycosaminoglycans, sulfated 
polysaccharides can prevent viral attachment and pen -
etration and obstruct virus–host interactions (Kanekiyo et 
al. 2007). These polymers may improve innate immune 
responses and lessen inflammation in infected tissues. Cya-
nobacterial polysaccharides are attractive prospects for 
antiviral and nanobiotechnological applications due to their 
high biocompatibility and structural diversity (da Silva And 
Teixeira 2024).
Cyanobacterial proteins as antiviral agents
Proteins, like polysaccharides, have the potential to inhibit 
viral replication. Among these, lectins have been extensively 
identified and isolated from various cyanobacterial species. 
Lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins that interact with 
glycoproteins or glycol-conjugated carbohydrates (Huskens 
et al. 2010). Their unique ability to bind directly to the car -
bohydrates or carbohydrate moieties enables them to play a 
critical role in antiviral defence mechanisms. When applied 
Page 17 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Table 4 Diverse biological functions of cyanobacterial metabolites as antiviral agents (adopted from Prabhu et al. 2022)
Metabolites Species Viruses Mode of study Mode of action References
Lectins Nostoc ellipsosporum HSV‐2, HVP In vitro; TZM‐bl Prevent the entrance of viruses into the body via 
urogenital epithelia
Peeri et al. 2020;
Mimouni et al., 2012;
Li et. al., 2008
Cyanovirin‐N Nostoc ellipsosporum HIV In vitro (PBL, MAC) Virustatic Levendosky et al. 2015
Phycobiliprotein Spirulina platensis MS‐2 ΦX‐174 In vitro (E. coli) Virucidal Boyd et al. 1997
Calcium spirulan Arthrospira platensis HSV‐1, CTMV , 
MeV , MuV , IA V , 
HIV‐1
In vitro (Vero, MDCK, HeLa, 
HEL, MT‐4) and In vitro (Vero)
Prevent virus adhesion to host cells Abd El Hamid et al. 2019; 
Hayashi et al. 1996
Allophycocyanin Arthrospira
platensis
Enterovirus‐71 
(EV71)
In vitro (Vero, 
humanrhabdomyosarcoma)
Prevent virus adhesion to host cells Lee et al. 2001
Arthrospira crude 
extracts
Arthrospira platensis HSV‐1 In vitro (Vero) Prevent virus adhesion to host cells Shih et al. 2003
Nostoflan Nostoc flagelliforme HSV‐1 In vitro (Vero) Prevent the virus adhesion to host cells Sharaf et al. 2010
Dolastatin 3 Lyngbya majuscula HIV‐1 Enzyme assay Anti‐HIV‐1 integrase (inhibit the viral replication 
cycle)
Kanekiyo et al. 2007
Cyanobacterial 
extracts
Nostoc, Phormidium, 
Oscillatoria, Chroococcus, 
Schizothrix, Aphanocapsa, 
Synechococcus, Aphanothece, 
Xenococcus
AMVHIV‐1 Enzyme assay Anti‐RT (inhibit the viral replication cycle) Buffa et al. 2009
Ichthyopeptins A/B Microcystis ichthyoblabe I AV In vitro (MDCK) Protease inhibition (inhibit viral processing after 
replication)
Reichert et al. 2017
Cyanovirin‐N Nostoc ellipsosporum HIV‐1 In vitro (CD4 + HeLa) Anti‐syncytia formation (Inhibit the viral release) Levendosky et al. 2015
Cyanovirin‐N Not reported HIV‐1 In vitro (TZM‐bl) Anti‐syncytia formation (Inhibit the viral release) Zainuddin et al. 2007
Scytovirin Scytonema varium EVD In vivo Inhibit the virus penetration to the host cell Garrison et al. 2014
Microvirin Microcystis aeruginosa HIV‐1 In vitro (CD4 + T‐cells) Anti‐syncytia formation (Inhibit the viral release) Huskens And Schols 2012
Lipoprotein Arthrospira platensis I AV In vivo (murine) Decreased histopathology Pugh et al. 2015
Lipoprotein Arthrospira platensis (H1N1) In vitro (THP‐1) Upregulate IL‐1β, TNF‐α, (IL)–8, MCP‐1, MIP‐1, 
MIP‐1, IP‐10, COX‐2
Pugh et al. 2001; Grzanna 
et al. 2006
EVD Ebola virus disease, HIV Human immunodeficiency virus, HSV Herpes simplex viruses, HVP Human papillomavirus, IAV Influenza A virus, TNF-a Tumor necrosis factor-a, IP-10 
Interferon gamma-induced protein 10, MCP-1 monocyte, hemo attractant protein-1, MIP-1 macrophage inflammatory protein-1, IL-18 Interleukin-18, and IL-8 Interleukin 8
282 Page 18 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
topically as microbicides, lectins have demonstrated signifi-
cant potential in suppressing viral replication, making them 
promising candidates for the development of novel antiviral 
therapies.
Cyanovirin‐N
Cyanovirin-N, a glycoprotein derived from HIV gp120, 
consists of 101 amino acids and has a molecular weight of 
11 kDa. In vitro studies have demonstrated that cyanovirin-
N effectively suppresses several HIV laboratory strains and 
primary isolates, exhibiting LC 50 values below 5 nmol/L. 
Its antiviral mechanism is primarily driven by an irrevers -
ible binding to HIV gp120, which prevents the virus from 
attaching to target cells. The cyanovirin-N and gp120 com-
plex has proven to be resistant to denaturing agents, giving 
cyanovirin-N a strong virustatic effect against HIV virions 
(Boyd et al. 1997). Another study reported that cyanovirin-
N from Nostoc ellipsosporum significantly reduced HIV 
infection in Rhesus macaques by 63–85%. In vitro, cyano-
virin-N consistently inactivated HIV virions with minimal 
cytotoxicity, highlighting its potential as a promising antivi-
ral agent for HIV treatment (Huskens et al. 2010).
Scytovirin
Scytovirin, a 95-amino acid protein, has demonstrated 
inhibitory effects against a range of viruses, including HIV , 
the Zaire ebolavirus, Marburg virus, and SARS-CoV (Li et 
al. 2008; Bokesch et al. 2003). In studies involving Ebola-
infected mice, scytovirin administered at a dose of 30 mg/
kg every 6 h resulted in the survival of 9 out of 10 mice, 
highlighting its potent antiviral potential. Isolated from 
Scytonema varium using an aqueous extraction method, 
scytovirin was found to contain agglutinin, a protein that 
binds strongly to glycoproteins on viral envelopes, thereby 
blocking viral entry into target cells (Sato et al. 2007). Addi-
tionally, Oscillatoria agardhii, another cyanobacterial spe -
cies, has also been associated with antiviral compounds. 
A patent by O’Keefe et al ( 2015) revealed that scytovirin 
holds promising effect as a novel antiviral agent, particu -
larly in the treatment of infections caused by high-mannose-
enveloped viruses, such as hepatitis C virus (HCV).
Phycobiliproteins
Water-soluble pigment–protein complexes known as phy -
cobiliproteins serve as accessory light-harvesting elements 
in cyanobacterial photosynthetic machinery. These proteins, 
which are arranged on the surface of the thylakoid mem -
brane within phycobilisomes, effectively absorb light energy 
and transmit it to chlorophyll a during photosynthesis. The 
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral qualities of 
phycobiliproteins have garnered attention in addition to 
their physiological function in light harvesting, making 
them attractive options for use in biotechnology, nutraceuti-
cals, and biomedical research (Kumar et al. 2022; Mogany 
et al. 2018; Saad et al. 2022). In vitro study investigated 
the antiviral activity of A. platensis extract against the bac-
teriophages MS2 and phiX174. MS2, a single-stranded 
RNA virus, is commonly used as a model for human polio-
virus, hepatitis A virus, and enteroviruses, while phiX174, 
a single-stranded DNA virus, simulates hepatitis B, HCV , 
and HIV infections (Bello-Morales et al. 2022). The study 
revealed that phycobiliprotein-containing extracts from A. 
platensis exhibited a strong virucidal effect on both phages 
by altering the structure of their viral capsids, thus prevent-
ing their integration into E. coli. Notably, both phages in this 
study lack lipid envelopes, similar to several other viruses 
examined in prior research, suggesting that the virucidal 
action results from the direct interaction of phycobilipro -
teins with the protein capsid.
Discovering new anti-cancer compounds 
through microalgal uniqueness
Since cyanobacterial metabolites can interact with basic 
biological processes involved in tumor growth and survival, 
they have garnered a lot of interest in cancer research (Gon-
çalves et al. 2024; Joshi And Bharadvaja 2023; Pathak et al. 
2021). Numerous cyanobacterial substances have antican -
cer properties through apoptosis induction, protein synthesis 
inhibition, microtubule dynamics disruption, or interference 
with cell-cycle regulation (Palko-Łabuz et al. 2020). For 
example, substances produced from dolastatin prevent tubu-
lin polymerization, which causes mitotic arrest and apopto-
sis in cancer cells that divide quickly, while cryptophycins 
have a strong cytotoxic effect by disrupting microtubule 
assembly. Apratoxins are among the other metabolites that 
impede the growth of tumor cells by preventing co-trans -
lational translocation in the secretory route (Kazemi et al. 
2021). By targeting pathways that are challenging to modify 
with traditional synthetic medications, cyanobacteria are a 
valuable source of structurally unique compounds.
Quinone-based natural compounds, known as calothrix -
ins, have been isolated from Calothrix and exhibit potent 
antiproliferative property against various cancer cell lines 
(Mahedi 2022; Robles-Bañuelos et al. 2022; Tan And Phyo 
2020). Notably, calothrixin B demonstrated significant 
efficacy against HCT-116 colon cancer cell line, with an 
IC50 value of 0.32 µM, indicating its strong antiprolifera -
tive potential (Hatae et al. 2014). Other microalgae-derived 
compounds have also shown promising effect in targeting 
Page 19 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
colon cancer. For instance, marine cyanobacteria produce 
malyngamides, small amides that include malyngamide C 
and 8-epi-malyngamide C, which exhibited cytotoxic effects 
against HT-29 colon cancer cells with IC50 values of 5.2 and 
15.4 µM, respectively. Mero cyclophanes A and B, isolated 
from a terrestrial Nostoc sp. (UIC 10022A), also demon -
strated significant antiproliferative property against HT-29 
cells, with an IC 50 values of 3.3 and 1.7 µM, respectively 
(Kang et al. 2012). Furthermore, the secondary metabolite 
hierridin B, a polyketide isolated from Cyanobium sp. LEGE 
06113, exhibited selective cytotoxicity against HT-29 cells, 
with an IC50 value of 0.1 mM (Leao et al. 2013).
Glembatumumab vedotin, a cyanobacterial-derived pep-
tide currently in Phase II clinical trials, has shown significant 
efficacy in the treatment of breast cancer and melanoma. 
Another promising class of cyanobacterial compounds are 
apratoxins, cyclic depsipeptides first discovered in Microne-
sia (Luesch et al. 2006). Apratoxin A, a key member of this 
group, has been shown to induce apoptosis and induce a dis-
tinct G1 cell cycle arrest. Moreover, apratoxin A effectively 
inhibits secretory pathway through co-translational translo-
cation blockage. Several bilirubin-like compounds derived 
from S. platensis have been reported to exhibit antitumor 
activity, particularly against pancreatic cancer (Konícková 
et al. 2014). Similarly, largazole, a compound isolated from 
Symploca sp., has demonstrated significant antiprolifera -
tive effects due to its unique chemical structure (Taori et 
al. 2008). Apratoxins shows their potent cytotoxicity against 
various cancer cell lines at nanomolar concentrations. For 
example, apratoxin A, derived from the cyanobacterial 
strain Lyngbya bouillonii, exhibits cytotoxic activity against 
adenocarcinoma cells. Additionally, coibamide, isolated 
from Leptolyngbya sp., has demonstrated toxicity against 
mouse neuro-2a and NCI-H460 lung cancer cells (Medina 
et al. 2008).
Numerous cyanobacterial compounds exhibit potent 
cytotoxicity, a characteristic that has garnered significant 
attention in cancer research (Gerwick et al. 2001). Nota -
bly, borophycin, cryptophycins 1 and 8, and cyanovirin 
are among the most significant discoveries in this context. 
Borophycin, a boron-containing metabolite, was isolated 
from Nostoc linckia and Nostoc spongiforme (Banker And 
Carmeli 1998). This compound has demonstrated cytotoxic 
effects against human epidermoid carcinoma (LoV o) and 
human colorectal adenocarcinoma (KB) cell lines. Violax -
anthin identified as pro-apoptotic and antiproliferative activ-
ities against various human cancer cell lines (Pasquet et al. 
2011). Notably, the natural oxadiazine nocuolin A (NoA), 
characterized by its unique 1,2,3-oxadiazine structure, has 
been isolated from several cyanobacterial genera, including 
Nostoc, Nodularia, and Anabaena. These genera have dem-
onstrated biodiversity of natural products, as evidenced by 
the identification of putative gene clusters associated with 
NoA biosynthesis in their genomes (V oráčová et al. 2017). 
Research indicates that NoA-induced cell death exhibits 
characteristics consistent with caspase-dependent apoptosis. 
Interestingly, NoA demonstrates anti-proliferative effects 
against a range of human cancer cell lines, particularly those 
harboring mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, with 
IC₅₀ values ranging from 0.7 to 4.5 μM (V oráčová et al. 
2017). NoA as a member of a novel class of heterocyclic 
natural metabolites, highlighting its potential as a therapeu-
tic agent in cancer treatment.
Historically, similar heterocyclic structures have pri -
marily been confined to synthetic compounds, particularly 
those based on 1,3,4- or 1,2,4-oxadiazines, where a carbon 
atom is strategically incorporated between two nitrogen 
atoms or between a N and an O atom, effectively disrupt -
ing the N–N–O linkage system (Bajaj et al. 2015). The only 
documented cases of actual N–N–O linkages occur within 
5 membered rings, specifically in 1,2,3-oxadiazole deriva -
tives (Semenov And Makarova 2011). Initially, the existence 
of a closed 1,2,3-oxadiazole ring was deemed improbable, 
as quantum chemical modelling predicted that an open-ring 
form would be more stable (Nguyen et al. 1985). However, 
incorporation of specific substituents can shift the equi -
librium towards the cyclic form, as evidenced by various 
synthetic 1,2,3-oxadiazole derivatives (Todres 2011). The 
discovery of nocuolin A (NoA) offers novel insights into the 
chemistry of heterocyclic structures featuring N–N–O link-
ages, revealing their occurrence in natural products. This is 
particularly significant from a pharmaceutical perspective, 
as 1,3,4-oxadiazoles represent a substantial platform for 
drug development (Bajaj et al. 2015). The interest in synthe-
sizing new 1,3,4-oxadiazole derivatives is growing, driven 
by their demonstrated wide-ranging biological activities. 
Notably, synthetic 1,3,4-oxadiazine derivatives have exhib-
ited high efficacy against cancer cells in the nano-molar 
range (Mohareb And Schatz 2011).
Techniques for solving problems: creation 
of high potency drug delivery formula 
possibility of microalgal drug development 
using peptides
Peptide conjugation strategies have been leveraged in the 
pharmaceutical industry to address the challenges of stabil-
ity and solubility associated with natural compound-based 
drug development (Chuang et al. 2009; Anand et al. 2023; 
Ibeanu et al. 2020; Karki et al. 2020). Extensive research 
has been focused on identifying novel treatments for malig-
nant cells, utilizing natural peptides from diverse sources as 
well as their synthetic analogs (Thundimadathil 2012; Singh 
282 Page 20 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
et al. 2011; Tabassum and Ahmad 2022). Cationic antitumor 
peptides, in particular, have garnered attention as promis -
ing agents for anticancer therapies, owing to their numer -
ous advantages over traditional chemical agents (Alas et 
al. 2020). These include a low molecular mass, relatively 
straightforward structures, heightened specificity in target -
ing tumor cells compared to healthy cells, a reduced propen-
sity to induce multidrug resistance, and favorable absorption 
characteristics (Liu et al. 2013; Mader And Hoskin 2006). 
When used in combination with conventional therapeutic 
agents, these peptides have the potential to enhance drug 
efficacy, thereby improving treatment outcomes (Chuang et 
al. 2009).
Currently, there are approximately 50 to 60 approved 
peptide drugs on commercial platforms, with expectations 
for this number to increase in the coming years. Among 
these, three of the four peptide drugs utilized for cancer 
treatment leuprolide acetate (Lupron), goserelin acetate 
(Zoladex), and octreotide acetate (Sandostatin) have col -
lectively achieved global sales exceeding $1 billion USD 
(Reichert et al. 2010; Thundimadathil 2012). Notably, 
around 30 peptides have been discovered as peptide-based 
anticancer drugs, establishing a foundational platform for 
cancer therapy (Mendoza et al. 2005). Combining bioactive 
peptides can improve stability against enzymatic degrada -
tion, boost formulation flexibility, and create synergistic 
interactions that promote medicinal effectiveness (Wang 
et al. 2021). Multiple molecular pathways may be targeted 
simultaneously by synergistic peptide combinations, which 
could lower the dosage requirement and prevent the develop-
ment of resistance. Furthermore, in pharmaceutical formu -
lations, peptide combinations can enhance pharmacokinetic 
characteristics, solubility, and delivery effectiveness. This 
approach may offer advantages over single isolated microal-
gal compounds. However, peptide-based developments are 
not without their drawbacks, including poor bioavailability, 
instability, insolubility in natural compounds, and potential 
toxicity to host cells (Reichert et al. 2010). These challenges 
could significantly hinder the application of cost-effective 
production methods for marine-derived compounds in com-
mercial platforms.
Nano formulation based on microalgal 
polysaccharides
Cyanobacterial polysaccharides are becoming more and 
more popular as biocompatible materials for use in nanobio-
technology. Essential characteristics of these extracellular 
and intracellular polysaccharides include their low toxicity, 
biodegradability, structural flexibility, and capacity to pro -
duce hydrogels and nanoparticulate systems. Cyanobacterial 
polysaccharides are therefore attractive options for environ-
mental applications, medication administration, and the pro-
duction of biomaterials.
Cyanobacterial polymer-based nanopolysaccharide 
systems can serve as carriers for bioactive substances, 
enhancing their solubility, stability, and controlled 
release. Their functional groups facilitate cross-linking 
and chemical manipulation, enabling the creation of 
nanoparticles with specific physicochemical character -
istics. Polysaccharide-based nanoparticles have been 
investigated in biomedical settings for antibacterial for -
mulations, antioxidant delivery, and medicinal chemi -
cal encapsulation. Numerous studies have investigated 
polysaccharide-based nanomaterials for a variety of 
biomedical applications, including antimicrobial activ -
ity, drug and gene delivery, tissue engineering, cancer 
therapy, and wound healing. Notably, research indicates 
that cyanobacteria secrete polysaccharides, which exhibit 
diverse biological effects, including antiviral activity 
(Kanekiyo et al. 2005). Cyanobacterial polysaccharides 
released by A. platensis have demonstrated in vitro and 
in vivo antiviral activity against two strains of vaccinia 
virus and Ectromelia virus, highlighting their potential as 
a source of biologically active compounds for therapeutic 
applications.
A novel acidic polysaccharide known as nostoflan, 
derived from N. flagelliforme , has exhibited significant 
antiviral potential against various enveloped viruses, 
including the influenza virus (Kanekiyo et al. 2005). Fur-
thermore, compounds that scavenge free radicals, such 
as sulfated polysaccharides isolated from cyanobacte -
ria, have been shown to mitigate cancer development. 
Additionally, polysaccharides extracted from Spirulina 
have demonstrated a range of biological activities, with 
research indicating that sulfated polysaccharides inhibit 
tumor cell proliferation both in vitro (Jia et al. 2008) and 
in vivo (Akao et al. 2009). Since polysaccharide–lipid 
hybrid nanoparticles are commonly employed in drug 
delivery systems, lipid components are pertinent even 
though this section concentrates on nanopolysaccha -
rides. Several microalgal species, including Chaetoceros , 
Isochrysis , Nannochloropsis , Pavlova , Phaeodacty -
lum, Skeletonema , Thalassiosira , and Tetraselmis , have 
shown promising effect in animal nutrition due to their 
rich content of biologically active essential lipids, such as 
omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (Muller-Feuga 2000). 
Despite the compositional differences among microalgae, 
their bioactive components may yield enhanced benefits 
when integrated with other nanostructures, suggesting a 
valuable avenue for advancing nutraceutical and thera -
peutic applications.
Page 21 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Cyanobacterial metabolite research: 
computational and analytical tools
Identification and measurement of metabolites are key com-
ponents of metabolite analysis, which is an essential part 
of comprehending biological systems. Numerous tools and 
software have been created to aid in this process, allowing 
researchers to quickly evaluate and comprehend intricate 
metabolomics data.
Cyanobacterial metabolite and biosynthesis 
gene cluster databases
Publicly accessible databases, which offer curated genomic, 
biochemical, and metabolite data, are essential to the study 
of cyanobacterial metabolites. These databases, including 
GenBank, KEGG, UniProt, and MIBiG, are fundamental 
tools for the functional characterisation and computational 
identification of cyanobacterial metabolites.
In order to properly convey complicated data insights, 
data visualization is a crucial component of metabolomics 
research. To make data visualization easier, a number of 
software applications have been created, including ggplot2, 
a well-liked R data visualization program with features 
including editable graphs and plots, Matplotlib is a feature-
rich Python data visualization package that offers resources 
for producing excellent 2D and 3D charts. Cytoscape is a 
network visualization software platform that helps scientists 
see and examine intricate biological networks (Shannon et 
al. 2003). With the aid of the aforementioned software and 
tools, researchers can identify metabolites i.e., find out if 
biological samples contain metabolites and in what quanti -
ties; analyse metabolic pathways means recognize impor -
tant pathways involved in different biological processes and 
comprehend metabolic networks and data visualization to 
make metabolomics data easier to understand and commu -
nicate, create charts and networks.
A curated database devoted to cyanobacterial second -
ary metabolites, CyanoMetDB offers physicochemical 
characteristics, molecular formulas, chemical structures, 
and literature references for cyanometabolites that have 
been described. This website facilitates comparative 
chemical studies, metabolite identification, and derepli -
cation in cyanobacterial research (Jones et al. 2021). The 
term “CyanoMet Mass” most likely describes a mass 
spectrometry-based method for examining cyanobacterial 
metabolites. In complicated biological systems, mass spec -
trometry is a potent analytical method for identifying and 
measuring metabolites. This method can assist researchers 
in finding new molecules with potential uses in biotechnol -
ogy, agriculture, or pharmaceuticals by identifying novel 
metabolites, describing metabolic pathways means recog -
nizing how metabolites are produced and regulated in cya -
nobacteria, and calculate the metabolite abundance vary in 
response to genetic or environmental changes. Hence, by 
using mass spectrometry to investigate the metabolism of 
cyanobacteria, researchers can learn more about the biol -
ogy and chemistry of these organisms, which will ultimately 
help with applications in industries like biotechnology and 
medicine.
Structures, taxonomy of producing organisms, classifica-
tions of biosynthetic and chemical ontologies, categoriza -
tion by compound classes, and cross-links to a variety of 
other natural product-related data resources are all included 
in the Natural Products Atlas, a database of natural products 
created from microbes. A comprehensive database and tool, 
the Natural Product Atlas was created to make it easier to 
find, annotate, and analyze natural products. Researchers 
may examine the chemical structures, biological activity, 
and biosynthetic routes of a large number of known natural 
compounds. Some important characteristics are Database 
search: By using criteria like name, structure, or biological 
activity, users can look for certain natural items. Structure 
analysis: The platform provides capabilities for predict -
ing attributes and analyzing chemical structures. Analysis 
of biosynthetic routes: Scientists can investigate the bio -
synthetic pathways connected to natural products. By the 
use of the Natural Product Atlas, the researchers are able 
to find new substances and investigate their possible uses 
and look into the biological processes and modes of action 
of natural substances. Through its extensive and intuitive 
interface, the Natural Product Atlas speeds up natural prod-
uct chemistry research, enabling advancements in industries 
including biotechnology, agriculture, and medicines (Poyn-
ton et al. 2025). Further, PubChem is an extensive online 
database of chemical compounds that gives users access to 
a wealth of data about molecules, such as their characteris -
tics, structures, and biological activities. PubChem facili -
tates advancements in drug development, environmental 
science, and public health by accelerating research in chem-
istry, biology, and allied subjects through the provision of 
an extensive and freely available database (Kim et al. 2025).
The Norman Network ALGALTOX List tool is a thor -
ough database or platform that offers vital information about 
algal toxins, supporting environmental monitoring, public 
health protection, and research. It provides materials on 
detection techniques for biological and aquatic samples, 
along with in-depth information on the structures, charac -
teristics, and toxicity profiles of various algal toxins. The 
ALGALTOX List application centralizes this data, mak -
ing it accessible to researchers, environmental scientists, 
and public health experts. This facilitates advancements 
in aquatic ecosystem management, environmental science, 
282 Page 22 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
and public health. The ecosystem and human health can be 
shielded from the harmful impacts of algae toxins by using 
this tool to guide mitigation methods and inform risk assess-
ments (US Epa 2019).
The resource known as the NORINE database is basi -
cally devoted to nonribosomal peptides (NRPs), a broad cat-
egory of bioactive substances produced by non-ribosomal 
peptide synthetases (NRPS). With the help of this platform 
researchers investigate the structures, characteristics, and 
biosynthetic mechanisms of NRP. Natural product discov -
ery, pharmaceutical research, and biocatalysis are all made 
easier by NORINE central NRP research hub, which even -
tually speeds up biotechnology and treatment development 
(Caboche et al. 2007; Flissi et al. 2020). Furthermore, a 
comprehensive collection of natural products, the COCO -
NUT (COlleCtion of Open Natural prodUcTs) database was 
launched in 2021 which provides researchers with a single 
platform to access in-depth details about their structures, 
characteristics, and biological activities (Sorokina et al. 
2021). COCONUT supports biotechnology, pharmaceuti -
cal research, and natural product discovery using capabili -
ties like database search, structural analysis, and biological 
activity data. Scientists can discover new chemicals, look 
into their potential as medicines, and examine biotechno -
logical uses. In COCONUT database, abundance of natural 
product data propels advancements in agriculture, medi -
cine, and related sectors. This database bridges the gap 
between the discovery of natural products and real-world 
applications by speeding up research and innovation (Chan-
drasekhar et al. 2025).
Analytical and genome-mining tools
Cyanobacterial secondary metabolite identification, annota-
tion, and characterisation are made possible by analytical 
and genome-mining methods. Biosynthetic gene clusters 
can be automatically identified from genomic data using 
platforms like antiSMASH. Redundancy in natural prod -
uct discovery is decreased using metabolomics technolo -
gies that facilitate dereplication, spectrum comparison, and 
metabolite classification, such as GNPS molecular network-
ing and MetaboAnalyst. These techniques serve as a link 
between computational annotation and experimental metab-
olomics (Medema et al. 2011). The mass spectrometry is 
a popular method for analysing metabolites, a number of 
software applications have been created to process and 
examine data from this method. Among them are XCMS, 
a well-liked software program for handling and evaluating 
mass spectrometry data, especially for untargeted metabo -
lomics research. Whereas, Mzmine is a mass spectrom -
etry data analysis software platform with capabilities like 
identification, alignment, and peak detection (Katajamaa et 
al. 2006; Pluskal et al. 2010). MassHunter is a mass spec -
trometry data collection and analysis software program that 
offers capabilities for compound identification and quantita-
tive analysis.
Another effective method for metabolite analysis is 
NMR spectroscopy, and a number of software applications 
have been created to help with the processing of NMR data 
(Krylova And Kurashov 2022). These consist of Chenomx 
NMR Suite, is a software program for analysing NMR data 
that includes functions including component identification, 
quantification, and spectral processing while, MetaboMiner 
is a software program for metabolomics based on NMR that 
helps scientists find and measure compounds in intricate 
biological materials (Xia et al. 2008).
Interpreting metabolomics data requires an understand -
ing of metabolic networks and pathways. To make meta -
bolic pathway analysis easier, a number of software tools 
have been created, including MetaboAnalyst, an online 
tool for analysing metabolomics data that provides network 
visualization, pathway analysis, and enrichment analysis 
(Xia And Wishart 2016). Researchers may find and exam -
ine metabolic pathways in a variety of organisms by using 
KEGG, a comprehensive database of metabolic processes. 
Reactome is a database of biological pathways, including 
metabolic pathways, that offers visualization and analytical 
tools (Fabregat et al. 2018).
Artificial intelligence (AI) based methods for 
cyanometabolite discovery
The discovery of natural products, particularly studies on 
cyanobacterial secondary metabolites, has been profoundly 
altered by recent developments in artificial intelligence (AI) 
and machine learning (Fig. 6). Genome mining is increas -
ingly using AI-driven computational methods, which allow 
for the quick discovery and annotation of biosynthetic gene 
clusters (BGCs) that produce metabolites (Blin et al. 2016; 
Challis 2008; Kenshole et al. 2021; Medema et al. 2011; 
Weber et al. 2015). In order to predict biosynthetic path -
ways and related chemical scaffolds from genomic data, 
platforms like antiSMASH and the Minimum Informa -
tion about a Biosynthetic Gene cluster (MIBiG) repository 
combine rule-based algorithms with machine learning tech-
niques. This accelerates in the discovery of novel natural 
products (Blin et al. 2016; Kautsar et al. 2020; Terlouw et 
al. 2023).
In metabolomics, AI-based techniques are being used 
more and more for compound dereplication, structure pre -
diction, and annotation of unknown metabolites, in addi -
tion to genome analysis. In order to reduce redundancy and 
Page 23 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
experimental costs, machine learning models trained on 
large mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic resonance 
datasets make it easier to recognize patterns, classify metab-
olites, and predict structure–activity relationships (Hanni -
gan et al. 2019; Mullowney et al. 2023). Furthermore, deep 
learning frameworks have been investigated for strain engi-
neering, metabolic flux prediction, and culture condition 
optimization, all of which enable higher production of bio -
active secondary metabolites (Liao et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 
2025a, b; Zhang et al. 2026).
Using AI in conjunction with genomics, transcriptomics, 
and metabolomics in the context of cyanobacteria has great 
potential to reveal undiscover biosynthetic pathways, rank 
candidate metabolites for pharmaceutical screening, and 
improve sustainable production methods (Lu et al. 2025; 
Khan And Khan. 2025). In contrast to actinomycetes and 
fungi, the application of AI to cyanobacterial systems is 
still in its infancy; however, these computational methods 
offer a potent complement to biotechnological exploitation 
AI assisted cyanobacterial metabolitesd iscovery AI assisted cyanobacterial metabolites optimization
Identification of target
Genomics
Proteomics
Transcriptomics
Novelm etabolites prediction
anda nalysis
Enhanced metabolitep roduction
Cyanobacterial
culturea nd
production
Optimization for 
metabolite
enhancement,
optimized
conditions
Enhanced metabolites
Role of AI in
metabolomics
Toxins
BioactiveC ompounds
Antibiotics
Anticancer Agents
Antioxidants
Therapeutic
Opportunity
Drug Discovery
AntimicrobialA gents
Anti-cancerC ompounds
Agricultural
Bioproducts
Ecological Hazard
HarmfulA lgal Blooms
WaterC ontamination
Toxicity to Wildlife
HumanH ealthR isks
Dual nature of cyanobacterial metabolites: from
ecological hazard to therapeutic opportunity
Fig. 6 The schematic diagram represents the dual nature of cyanobacterial metabolites and the AI-assisted cyanometabolite drug discovery
 
282 Page 24 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
and secondary metabolite discovery (Skinnider et al. 2020, 
2021).
Conclusions and future prospects
Cyanobacteria are a metabolically diverse genus of pho -
tosynthetic microorganisms that can produce a variety of 
secondary metabolites with medicinal and ecological sig -
nificance. These substances come from specific biosynthetic 
pathways and are often involved in signaling, chemical 
defense, stress tolerance, and nutrition uptake. Research 
on cyanobacterial natural products continues to advance by 
gaining greater understanding of the connections between 
environmental factors, biosynthetic gene clusters, and 
metabolite activity. Despite significant advancements, there 
are still significant gaps in our understanding of cyanobacte-
rial metabolites. The majority of described chemicals come 
from a small number of taxa, and little is known about the 
metabolic potential of harsh conditions and understudied 
cyanobacterial lineages. Furthermore, the molecular targets 
of many metabolites are still unknown, and many biosyn -
thetic pathways forecasted by genome mining have not 
been experimentally validated. Future studies should focus 
on integrative methods that combine ecological analysis, 
biochemical validation, metabolomics, and genetics to elu -
cidate metabolite function and biosynthetic regulation. It is 
anticipated that developments in genome mining, computa-
tional analysis, and machine learning-based prediction tools 
would speed up the discovery of metabolites and enhance 
sustainable production methods. Conclusively, the conver -
sion of cyanobacterial chemical variety into trustworthy 
biotechnological and medicinal applications will require the 
integration of ecological context, biosynthetic pathways, 
and contemporary analytical techniques. In order to facili -
tate further advancements in the study of cyanobacterial 
metabolites, this review offers a summarized framework.
Acknowledgements All the authors are thankful to Department of 
Botany, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, and Department of Botany, 
Pt. Prithi Nath (PG) College (affiliated to CSJM University), Kanpur 
for the necessary facilities. Authors are also grateful for the reveiwers.
Author contributions SK and ZP wrote the manuscript. YG prepared 
the chemical structures. RPS and VK reviewed and edited the manu -
script. All the authors approved the manuscript.
Funding Not applicable.
Declarations
Conflict of interest Authors declared they have no conflict of interest.
Ethical approval Not applicable.
Consent to participate Not applicable.
Consent for publication All authors approve the publication of this 
work.
References
Abd El Hamid MI, Abd El Fatah WM, El Morsi AA, Draz MS, Kal -
lakuri S, Bungau S, Hafez EE (2019) Anti-HIV/HCV activity of 
cyanobacterial phycobiliproteins by a new standardized method 
using bacteriophage surrogates. Rev Chim 70:3115–3122 
Ahmad IZ, Singh A (2024) Algae-based pharmaceuticals for cancer 
treatment: present status and future application. Algal farming 
systems. Apple Academic Press, pp 311–356
Ahmad K, Khan S, Afridi M, Hassan A, Shah MM, Rasheed H, Ifqir H 
(2022) Marine macroalgae polysaccharides-based nanomaterials: 
an overview with respect to nanoscience applications. Beni-Suef 
Univ J Basic App Sci 11:156
Ahmadi A, Zorofchian Moghadamtousi S, Abubakar S, Zandi K 
(2015) Antiviral potential of algae polysaccharides isolated from 
marine sources: a review. Biomed Res Int 2015:825203
Akao Y , Ebihara T, Masuda H, Saeki Y , Akazawa T, Hazeki K, Seya 
T (2009) Enhancement of antitumor natural killer cell activa -
tion by orally administered Spirulina extract in mice. Cancer Sci 
100:1494–1501
Alas M, Saghaeidehkordi A, Kaur K (2020) Peptide–drug conjugates 
with different linkers for cancer therapy. J Med Chem 64:216–232
Alves A, Sousa E, Kijjoa A, Pinto M (2020) Marine-derived com -
pounds with potential use as cosmeceuticals and nutricosmetics. 
Mol 25:2536
Anand U, Bandyopadhyay A, Jha NK, Pérez de la Lastra JM, Dey 
A (2023) Translational aspect in peptide drug discovery and 
development: an emerging therapeutic candidate. BioFactors 
49:251–269
Ansari MZ, Yadav G, Gokhale RS, Mohanty D (2004) NRPS-PKS: a 
knowledge-based resource for analysis of NRPS/PKS megasyn -
thases. Nucleic Acids Res 32(suppl_2):W405–W413
Anupama, Ravindra P (2000) Value-added food: single cell protein. 
Biotechnol Adv 18:459–479
Armstrong GA, Alberti M, Hearst JE (1990) Conserved enzymes 
mediate the early reactions of carotenoid biosynthesis in nonpho-
tosynthetic and photosynthetic prokaryotes. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 87:9975–9979
Arnison PG, Bibb MJ, Bierbaum G, Bowers AA, Bugni TS, Bulaj G, 
Van Der Donk WA (2013) Ribosomally synthesized and post-
translationally modified peptide natural products: overview and 
recommendations for a universal nomenclature. Nat Prod Rep 
30:108–160
Arokiarajan MS, Thirunavukkarasu R, Joseph J, Ekaterina O, Aruni 
W (2022) Advance research in biomedical applications on marine 
sulfated polysaccharide. Int J Biol Macromol 194:870–881
Ashen JB, Cohen JD, Goff LJ (1999) GC-SIM-MS detection and 
quantification of free indole-3-acetic acid in bacterial galls on 
the marine alga Prionitis lanceolata (Rhodophyta). J Phycol 
35:493–500
Avalos M, Garbeva P, Vader L, van Wezel GP, Dickschat JS, Ulanova 
D (2022) Biosynthesis, evolution and ecology of microbial terpe-
noids. Nat Prod Rep 39:249–272
Bajaj S, Asati V , Singh J, Roy PP (2015) 1,3,4-Oxadiazoles: an emerg-
ing scaffold to target growth factors, enzymes and kinases as anti-
cancer agents. Eur J Med Chem 97:124–141
Balskus EP, Walsh CT (2010) The genetic and molecular basis for 
sunscreen biosynthesis in cyanobacteria. Science 329:1653–1656
Page 25 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Banker R, Carmeli S (1998) Tenuecyclamides A-D, cyclic hexapep -
tides from the cyanobacterium Nostoc spongiaeforme var. tenue. 
J Nat Prod 61:1248–1251
Bagu JR, Sykes BD, Craig MM, Holmes CFB (1997) A molecular 
basis for different interactions of marine toxins with protein phos-
phatase-1: molecular models for bound motuporin, microcystins, 
okadaic acid, and calyculin A. J Biol Chem 272:5087–5097 
Baunach M, Guljamow A, Miguel-Gordo M, Dittmann E (2024) Har -
nessing the potential: advances in cyanobacterial natural product 
research and biotechnology. Nat Prod Rep 41:347–369
Beiderbeck H, Taraz K, Budzikiewicz H, Walsby AE (2000) Anach -
elin, the siderophore of the cyanobacterium Anabaena cylindrica 
CCAP 1403/2A. Z Naturforsch 55:681–687
Belin BJ, Busset N, Giraud E, Molinaro A, Silipo A, Newman DK 
(2018) Hopanoid lipids: from membranes to plant–bacteria inter-
actions. Nat Reviews Microbiol 16:304–315
Bello-Morales R, Andreu S, Ruiz-Carpio V , Ripa I, López-Guerrero JA 
(2022) Extracellular polymeric substances: still promising antivi-
rals. Viruses 14:1337
Bentley FK, García-Cerdán JG, Chen HC, Melis A (2013) Paradigm of 
monoterpene (β-phellandrene) hydrocarbons production via pho-
tosynthesis in cyanobacteria. BioEnergy Res 6:917–929
Bhatia S, Garg A, Sharma K, Kumar S, Sharma A, Purohit AP (2011) 
Mycosporine and mycosporine-like amino acids: a paramount 
tool against ultra violet irradiation. Pharmacogn Rev 5:138
Biondi N, Piccardi R, Margheri MC, Rodolfi L, Smith GD, Tredici 
MR (2004) Evaluation of Nostoc strain ATCC 53789 as a 
potential source of natural pesticides. Appl Environ Microbiol 
70:3313–3320
Blin K, Medema MH, Kottmann R, Lee SY , Weber T (2016) The anti-
SMASH database, a comprehensive database of microbial sec -
ondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res 
23:gkw960
Blunt JW, Copp BR, Hu WP, Munro MHG, Northcote PT, Prinsep MR 
(2009) Marine natural products. Nat Prod Rep 26:170–244
Böhm GA, Pfleiderer W, Böger P, Scherer S (1995) Structure of a 
novel oligosaccharide-mycosporine-amino acid ultraviolet A/B 
sunscreen pigment from the terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc 
commune. J Biol Chem 270:8536–8539
Bokesch HR, O’Keefe BR, McKee TC, Pannell LK, Patterson GM, 
Boyd MR (2003) A potent novel anti-HIV protein from the 
cultured cyanobacterium Scytonema varium . Biochemistry 
42:2578–2584
Boyer GL, Dougherty SS (1988) Identification of abscisic acid in the 
seaweed Ascophyllum nodosum. Phytochemistry 27:1521–1522
Boyd MR, Gustafson KR, McMahon JB, Shoemaker RH, O'Keefe BR, 
Mori T, Gulakowski RJ, Wu L, Rivera MI, Laurencot CM, Cur -
rens MJ, Cardellina JH II, Buckheit RW Jr, Nara PL, Pannell LK, 
Sowder RC II, Henderson LE (1997) Discovery of cyanovirin-
N, a novel human immunodeficiency virus-inactivating protein 
that binds viral surface envelope glycoprotein gp120: potential 
applications to microbicide development. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 41:1521–1530
Bramley PM, Mackenzie A (1988) Regulation of carotenoid biosyn -
thesis. Curr Top Cell Regul 29:291–343
Buchanan D, Mori S, Chadli A, Panda SS (2025) Natural cyclic pep -
tides: synthetic strategies and biomedical applications. Biomed 
13:240
Buffa V , Stieh D, Mamhood N, Hu Q, Fletcher P, Shattock RJ (2009) 
Cyanovirin-N potently inhibits human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 infection in cellular and cervical explant models. J Gen 
Virol 90:234–243
Bultel-Poncé V , Félix-Théodose F, Sarthou C, Ponge JF, Bodo B 
(2004) New pigments from the terrestrial cyanobacterium Scyto-
nema sp. collected on the Mitaraka Inselberg, French Guyana. J 
Nat Prod 67:678–681
Buratti FM, Manganelli M, Vichi S, Stefanelli M, Scardala S, Testai E, 
Funari E (2017) Cyanotoxins: producing organisms, occurrence, 
toxicity, mechanism of action and human health toxicological risk 
evaluation. Arch Toxicol 91:1049–1130
Burja AM, Banaigs B, Abou-Mansour E, Burgess JG, Wright PC 
(2001) Marine cyanobacteria—a prolific source of natural prod -
ucts. Tetrahedron 57:9347–9377
Bury NR, Codd GA, Bonga SW, Flik G (1998) Fatty acids from the 
cyanobacterium Microcystis aeruginosa with potent inhibi -
tory effects on fish gill Na+/K+-ATPase activity. J Exp Biol 
201(1):81–89
Butler A, Carter-Franklin JN (2004) The role of vanadium bromoper -
oxidase in the biosynthesis of halogenated marine natural prod -
ucts. Nat Prod Rep 21:180–188
Caboche S, Pupin M, Leclere V , Fontaine A, Jacques P, Kucherov G 
(2007) NORINE: a database of nonribosomal peptides. Nucleic 
Acids Res 36(suppl_1):D326–D331
Cabrita MT, Vale C, Rauter AP (2010) Halogenated compounds from 
marine algae. Mar Drugs 8:2301–2317
Campos A, Vasconcelos V (2010) Molecular mechanisms of microcys-
tin toxicity in animal cells. Int J Mol Sci 11:268–287
Cardozo KH, Guaratini T, Barros MP, Falcão VR, Tonon AP, Lopes 
NP, Pinto E (2007) Metabolites from algae with economical 
impact. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol 146:60–78
Catherine, Rice-Evans Nicholas, Miller George, Paganga (1997) Anti-
oxidant properties of phenolic compounds Trends in Plant Science 
2(4):152–159. https:/ /doi.or g/10.10 16/S1 360-1385(97)01018-2
Carreto JI, Carignan MO (2011) Mycosporine-like amino acids: rel -
evant secondary metabolites. Chemical and ecological aspects. 
Mar Drugs 9:387–446
Cepoi L (2024) Secondary metabolites in cyanobacteria. Cyanobacte -
ria. Academic Press, pp 283–311
Challis GL (2008) Genome mining for novel natural product discov -
ery. J Med Chem 51:2618–2628
Chandrasekhar V , Rajan K, Kanakam SR, Sharma N, Weißenborn V , 
Schaub J, Steinbeck C (2025) COCONUT 2.0: a comprehensive 
overhaul and curation of the collection of open natural products 
database. Nucleic Acids Res 53(D1):D634–D643
Chuang CM, Monie A, Wu A, Mao CP, Hung CF (2009) Treatment 
with LL-37 peptide enhances antitumor effects induced by CpG 
oligodeoxynucleotides against ovarian cancer. Hum Gene Ther 
20:303–313
Čmiková N, Kowalczewski PŁ, Kmiecik D, Tomczak A, Drożdżyńska 
A, Ślachciński M, Kačániová M (2024) Characterization of 
selected microalgae species as potential sources of nutrients and 
antioxidants. Foods 13:2160
Cockell CS, Knowland J (1999) Ultraviolet radiation screening com -
pounds. Biol Rev 74:311–345
Codd GA, Morrison LF, Metcalf JS (2005) Cyanobacterial toxins: 
risk management for health protection. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 
203:264–272
Conde FR, Churio MS, Previtali CM (2000) The photoprotector mech-
anism of mycosporine-like amino acids. Excited-state properties 
and photostability of porphyra-334 in aqueous solution. J Photo -
chem Photobiol B Biol 56:139–144
da Silva MBF, Teixeira CML (2024) Cyanobacterial and microalgae 
polymers: antiviral activity and applications. Braz J Microbiol 
55:1–15
de la Rosa F, Pezzoni M, De Troch M, Costa CS, Hernando M (2024) 
Effects of temperature up-shift and UV-A radiation on fatty 
acids content and expression of desaturase genes in cyanobac -
teria Microcystis aeruginosa : stress tolerance and acclimation 
responses. Photochem Photobiol Sci 23:1–12
De Obeso Fernandez Del Valle A, Scheckhuber CQ (2021) From past 
to present: biotechnology in Mexico using algae and fungi. Plants 
10:2530
282 Page 26 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
de Souza NJ, Nes WR (1968) Sterols: isolation from a blue-green alga. 
Science 162:363–363
de Sousa Victor R, da Cunha Santos MA, de Sousa VB, de Araújo 
Neves G, de Lima Santana NL, Menezes RR (2020) A review on 
Chitosan’s uses as biomaterial: tissue engineering, drug delivery 
systems and cancer treatment. Materials Basel 13:4995
Devic E, Li D, Dauta A, Henriksen P, Codd GA, Marty JL, Fournier 
D (2002) Detection of anatoxin-a(s) in environmental samples of 
cyanobacteria by using a biosensor with engineered acetylcholin-
esterases. Appl Environ Microbiol 68:4102–4106
Dillon JG, Castenholz RW (1999) Scytonemin, a cyanobacterial 
sheath pigment, protects against UVC radiation: implications for 
early photosynthetic life. J Phycol 35:673–681
Dittmann E, Wiegand C (2006) Cyanobacterial toxins-occurrence, 
biosynthesis and impact on human affairs. Mol Nutr Food Res 
50:7–17
Dittmann E, Gugger M, Sivonen K, Fewer DP (2015) Natural product 
biosynthetic diversity and comparative genomics of the cyano -
bacteria. Trends Microbiol 23:642–652
Djuricic I, Calder PC (2021) Beneficial outcomes of omega-6 and 
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on human health: an update 
for 2021. Nutrients 13:2421
Ducat DC, Way JC, Silver PA (2011) Engineering cyanobacteria to 
generate high-value products. Trends Biotechnol 29:95–103
Dye C, O’Garra A (2014) The science of infectious diseases. Philos 
Trans R Soc B Biol Sci 369:20140055
Edwards DJ, Marquez BL, Nogle LM, McPhail K, Goeger DE, Rob -
erts MA, Gerwick WH (2004) Structure and biosynthesis of the 
jamaicamides, new mixed polyketide-peptide neurotoxins from 
the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya majuscula . Chem Biol 
11:817–833
El-Baz FK, El-Senousy WM, El-Sayed AB, Kamel MM (2013) In 
vitro antiviral and antimicrobial activities of Spirulina platensis 
extract. J Appl Pharm Sci 3:52–56
Elsheikh S, Eltanahy E (2024) Overview of secondary metabolites in 
cyanobacteria: a potential source of plant growth-promoting and 
abiotic stress resistance. Bacterial secondary metabolites. Else -
vier, pp 29–57
Fabregat A, Jupe S, Matthews L, Sidiropoulos K, Gillespie M, 
Garapati P, Haw R, Jassal B, Korninger F, May B, Milacic M 
(2018) The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids Res 
46:D649–D655
Fabris M, Matthijs M, Carbonelle S, Moses T, Pollier J, Dasseville 
R, Goossens A (2014) Tracking the sterol biosynthesis path -
way of the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum . New Phytol 
204:521–535
Faltermann S, Zucchi S, Kohler E, Blom JF, Pernthaler J, Fent K 
(2014) Molecular effects of the cyanobacterial toxin cyanopep -
tolin (CP1020) occurring in algal blooms: global transcriptome 
analysis in zebrafish embryos. Aquat Toxicol 149:33–39
Favre-Bonvin J, Bernillon J, Salin N, Arpin N (1987) Biosynthesis of 
mycosporines: mycosporine glutaminol in Trichothecium roseum. 
Phytochemistry 26:2509–2514
Ferrão-Filho ADS, Kozlowsky-Suzuki B (2011) Cyanotoxins: bioaccu-
mulation and effects on aquatic animals. Mar Drugs 9:2729–2772
Ferrari PF, Palmieri D, Casazza AA, Aliakbarian B, Perego P, Palombo 
D (2015) TNFα-induced endothelial activation is counteracted by 
polyphenol extract from UV-stressed cyanobacterium Arthro-
spira platensis. Med Chem Res 24:275–282
Ferroni L, Klisch M, Pancaldi S, Häder DP (2010) Complementary 
UV-absorption of mycosporine-like amino acids and scytonemin 
is responsible for the UV-insensitivity of photosynthesis in Nos-
toc flagelliforme. Mar Drugs 8:106–121
Fischer NH (1991) Plant terpenoids as allelopathic agents. Marcel 
Dekker, pp 377–398
Flissi A, Ricart E, Campart C, Chevalier M, Dufresne Y , Michalik 
J, Jacques P, Flahaut C, Lisacek F, Leclère V , Pupin M (2020) 
Norine: update of the nonribosomal peptide resource. Nucleic 
Acids Res 8(D1):D465–D469
Florczyk M, Łakomiak A, Woźny M, Brzuzan P (2014) Neurotoxicity 
of cyanobacterial toxins. Environ Biotec 10:26–43
Forin MC, Maume B, Baron C (1972) Sterols and triterpene alcohols 
of a Cyanophyceae: Spirulina platensis Geitler. C R Acad Hebd 
Seances Acad Sci D 274:133–136
Foster RA, Kuypers MM, Vagner T, Paerl RW, Musat N, Zehr JP 
(2011) Nitrogen fixation and transfer in open ocean diatom–cya -
nobacterial symbioses. ISME J 5:1484–1493
Frentzen M, Heinz E, McKeon TA, Stumpf PK (1983) Specificities 
and selectivities of glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase and 
monoacylglycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase from pea and 
spinach chloroplasts. Eur J Biochem 129:629–636
Froehlich JE, Poorman R, Reardon E, Barnum SR, Jaworski JG (1990) 
Purification and characterization of acyl carrier protein from two 
cyanobacteria species. Eur J Biochem 193:817–825
Funk CD (2001) Prostaglandins and leukotrienes: advances in eico -
sanoid biology. Science 294:1871–1875
Fujiki H, Sugimura T, Moore RE (1983) New classes of environmen -
tal tumor promoters: indole alkaloids and polyacetates. Environ 
Health Perspect 50:85–90
Gácsi M, Antal O, Vasas G, Máthé C, Borbély G, Saker ML, Győri J, 
Farkas A, Vehovszky Á, Bánfalvi G (2009) Comparative study 
of cyanotoxins affecting cytoskeletal and chromatin structures in 
CHO-K1 cells. Toxicol in Vitro 23:710–718
Gademann K, Portmann C (2008) Secondary metabolites from cyano-
bacteria: complex structures and powerful bioactivities. Curr Org 
Chem 12:326–341
Gademann K, Kobylinska J, Wach JY , Woods TM (2009) Surface 
modifications based on the cyanobacterial siderophore anach -
elin: from structure to functional biomaterials design. Biometals 
22:595–604
Gago G, Diacovich L, Arabolaza A, Tsai SC, Gramajo H (2011) 
Fatty acid biosynthesis in actinomycetes. FEMS Microbiol Rev 
35:475–497
Gao Q, Garcia-Pichel F (2011) Microbial ultraviolet sunscreens. Nat 
Rev Microbiol 9:791–802
Gao X, Gao F, Liu D, Zhang H, Nie X, Yang C (2016) Engineering 
the methylerythritol phosphate pathway in cyanobacteria for pho-
tosynthetic isoprene production from CO2. Energy Environ Sci 
9:1400–1411
Gao X, Jing X, Liu X, Lindblad P (2021) Biotechnological production 
of the sunscreen pigment scytonemin in cyanobacteria: progress 
and strategy. Mar Drugs 19:129
Garcia-Pichel F, Castenholz RW (1991) Characterization and biologi-
cal implications of scytonemin, a cyanobacterial sheath pigment. 
J Phycol 27:395–409
Garcia-Pichel F, Castenholz RW (1993) Occurrence of UV-absorbing, 
mycosporine-like compounds among cyanobacterial isolates and 
an estimate of their screening capacity. Appl Environ Microbiol 
59:163–169
Garcia-Pichel F, Sherry ND, Castenholz RW (1992) Evidence for an 
ultraviolet sunscreen role of the extracellular pigment scytonemin 
in the terrestrial cyanobacterium Chiorogloeopsis sp. Photochem 
Photobiol 56:17–23
Garrison AR, Giomarelli BG, Lear-Rooney CM, Saucedo CJ, Yel -
layi S, Krumpe LR, Rose M, Paragas J, Bray M, Olinger GG Jr, 
McMahon JB, Huggins J, O’Keefe BR (2014) The cyanobacte -
rial lectin scytovirin displays potent in vitro and in vivo activity 
against Zaire Ebola virus. Antivir Res 112:1–7
Gayathri M, Kumar PS, Prabha AML, Muralitharan G (2015) In vitro 
regeneration of Arachis hypogaea L. and Moringa oleifera Lam. 
Page 27 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
using extracellular phytohormones from Aphanothece sp. MBDU 
515. Algal Res 7:100–105
Gershenzon J, Dudareva N (2007) The function of terpene natural 
products in the natural world. Nat Chem Biol 3:408–414
Gerwick WH, Tan LT, Sitachitta N (2001) Nitrogen-containing metab-
olites from marine cyanobacteria. Mar Biotechnol 3:75–184
Gogna S, Kaur J, Sharma K, Prasad R, Singh J, Bhadariya V , Kumar P, 
Jarial S (2023) Spirulina-an edible cyanobacterium with potential 
therapeutic health benefits and toxicological consequences. J Am 
Nutr Assoc 42:559–572
Goldman SJ, Lammers PJ, Berman MS, Sanders-Loehr J (1983) Sider-
ophore-mediated iron uptake in different strains of Anabaena sp.. 
J Bacteriol 156:1144–1150
Gonçalves CDCS, Barros MA, Bilha JK, Ottoni JR, Uliana MP, Pas -
sarini MR (2024) Pharmacological potential of cyanobacteria 
secondary metabolites. Stud Nat Prod Res 83:385–409
Görünmek M, Ballık B, Çakmak ZE, Çakmak T (2024) Mycosporine-
like amino acids in microalgae and cyanobacteria: biosynthesis, 
diversity, and applications in biotechnology. Algal Res 80:103507
Grant CS, Louda JW (2013) Scytonemin-imine, a mahogany-colored 
UV/Vis sunscreen of cyanobacteria exposed to intense solar radi-
ation. Org Geochem 65:29–36
Grishin E (2005) Natural toxins: the past and the present. Defense 
against bioterror: detection technologies, implementation strate -
gies and commercial opportunities. Springer Netherlands, Dor -
drecht, pp 29–45
Gröniger A, Häder DP (2000) Stability of mycosporine-like amino 
acids. Recent Res Dev Photochem Photobiol. pp. 247–252
Grzanna R, Polotsky A, Phan PV , Pugh N, Pasco D, Frondoza CG 
(2006) Immolina, a high-molecular-weight polysaccharide frac -
tion of Spirulina, enhances chemokine expression in human 
monocytic THP-1 cells. J Altern Complement Med 12:429–435
Guedes AC, Amaro HM, Barbosa CR, Pereira RD, Malcata FX (2011) 
Fatty acid composition of several wild microalgae and cyano -
bacteria, with a focus on eicosapentaenoic, docosahexaenoic 
and α-linolenic acids for eventual dietary uses. Food Res Int 
44:2721–2729
Gunasekera SP, Ross C, Paul VJ, Matthew S, Luesch H (2008) Drag -
onamides C and D, linear lipopeptides from the marine cyanobac-
terium brown Lyngbya polychroa. J Nat Prod 71:887–890
Gupta A, Agarwal P (1973) Extraction, isolation, and bioassay of a 
gibberellin-like substance from Phormidium foveolarum . Ann 
Bot 37:737–741
Gupta P, Phulara S (2021) Biotechnology of terpenoid production from 
microbial cell factories. Academic Press
Gupta A, Singh AP, Singh VK, Singh PR, Jaiswal J, Kumari N, Sinha 
RP (2023) Natural sun-screening compounds and DNA-repair 
enzymes: photoprotection and photoaging. Catalysts 13:745
Gutiérrez JM, Ponce-Soto LA, Marangoni S, Lomonte B (2008) Sys -
temic and local myotoxicity induced by snake venom group II 
phospholipases A2: comparison between crotoxin, crotoxin B and 
a Lys49 PLA2 homologue. Toxicon 51:80–92
Han SW, Won HS (2024) Advancements in the application of ribo -
somally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides 
(RiPPs). Biomolecules 14:479
Hannigan GD, Prihoda D, Palicka A (2019) A deep learning genome-
mining strategy for biosynthetic gene cluster prediction. Nucleic 
Acids Res 47:e110–e110
Hansson LA, Gustafsson S, Rengefors K, Bomark L (2007) Cyanobac-
terial chemical warfare affects zooplankton community composi-
tion. Freshw Biol 52:1290–1301
Hartung W (2010) The evolution of abscisic acid (ABA) and ABA 
function in lower plants, fungi and lichen. Funct Plant Biol 
37:806–812
Hashtroudi MS, Ghassempour A, Riahi H, Shariatmadari Z, Khan -
jir M (2013) Endogenous auxins in plant growth-promoting 
cyanobacteria-Anabaena vaginicola and Nostoc calcicola. J Appl 
Phycol 25:379–386
Hayashi T, Hayashi K, Maeda M, Kojima I (1996) Calcium spirulan, 
an inhibitor of enveloped virus replication, from a blue-green alga 
Spirulina platensis. J Nat Prod 59:83–87
Hatae N, Satoh R, Chiba H, Osaki T, Nishiyama T, Ishikura M, Toyota 
E (2014) N-substituted calothrixin B derivatives inhibited the 
proliferation of HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia cells. Med Chem 
Res 23:4956–4961
Helbling EW, Menchi CF, Villafañe VE (2002) Bioaccumulation 
and role of UV-absorbing compounds in two marine crustacean 
species from Patagonia, Argentina. Photochem Photobiol Sci 
1:820–825
Hellier P, Al-Haj L, Talibi M, Purton S, Ladommatos N (2013) Com -
bustion and emissions characterization of terpenes with a view to 
their biological production in cyanobacteria. Fuel 111:670–688
Hernández-Corona A, Nieves I, Meckes M, Chamorro G, Barron BL 
(2002) Antiviral activity of Spirulina maxima against herpes sim-
plex virus type 2. Antiviral Res 56:279–285
Hernando MP, Schloss IR, De La Rosa F, De Troch M (2022) Fatty 
acids in microalgae and cyanobacteria in a changing world: Con-
trasting temperate and cold environments. Biocell 46:607–621
Hill DR, Hladun SL, Scherer S, Potts M (1994) Water stress proteins 
of Nostoc commune (Cyanobacteria) are secreted with UV-A/B-
absorbing pigments and associate with 1,4-beta-D-xylanxylano -
hydrolase activity. J Biol Chem 269:7726–7734
Hirsch R, Hartung W, Gimmler H (1989) Abscisic acid content of 
algae under stress. Bot Acta 102:326–334
Hoshino Y (2024) Terpenoids and membrane dynamics evolution. 
Front Ecol Evol 12:1345733
Humpage AR, Fenech M, Thomas P, Falconer IR (2000) Micronucleus 
induction and chromosome loss in transformed human white cells 
indicate clastogenic and aneugenic action of the cyanobacterial 
toxin cylindrospermopsin. Mutat Res Genet Toxicol Environ 
Mutagen 472:155–161
Husain A, Nematullah M, Khan H, Shekher R, Farooqui A, Sahu A, 
Khanam A (2024) From pond scum to miracle molecules: cyano-
bacterial compounds new frontiers. Eur J Biol 83:94–105
Hussain A, Krischke M, Roitsch T, Hasnain S (2010) Rapid determi -
nation of cytokinins and auxin in cyanobacteria. Curr Microbiol 
61:361–369
Huskens D, Schols D (2012) Algal lectins as potential HIV microbi -
cide candidates. Mar Drugs 10:1476–1497
Huskens D, Férir G, Vermeire K, Kehr JC, Balzarini J, Dittmann E, 
Schols D (2010) Microvirin, a novel α(1,2)-mannose-specific lec-
tin isolated from Microcystis aeruginosa, has anti-HIV-1 activity 
comparable with that of cyanovirin-N but a much higher safety 
profile. J Biol Chem 285:24845–24854
Hussain A, Hasnain S (2011) Interactions of bacterial cytokinins and 
IAA in the rhizosphere may alter phytostimulatory efficiency of 
rhizobacteria. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 27:2645–2654
Hussain A, Hasnain S (2012) Comparative assessment of the efficacy 
of bacterial and cyanobacterial phytohormones in plant tissue cul-
ture. World J Microbiol Biotechnol 28:1459–1466
Hussain A, Hamayun M, Shah ST (2013) Root colonization and phy -
tostimulation by phytohormones producing entophytic Nostocsp. 
AH-12. Curr Microbiol 67:624–630
Hussain A, Hamayun M, Shah ST (2013) Root colonization and phy -
tostimulation by phytohormones producing entophytic Nostoc sp. 
AH-12. Curr Microbiol 67:624–630
Ibeanu N, Egbu R, Onyekuru L, Javaheri H, Tee Khaw PR, Williams 
G, Awwad S (2020) Injectables and depots to prolong drug action 
of proteins and peptides. Pharmaceutics 12:999
Ito Y , Butler A (2005) Structure of synechobactins, new siderophores 
of the marine cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. 
Limnol Oceanogr 50:1918–1923
282 Page 28 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Jeong Y , Cho SH, Lee H, Choi HK, Kim DM, Lee CG, Cho BK (2020) 
Current status and future strategies to increase secondary metabo-
lite production from cyanobacteria. Microorganisms 8:1849
Jepson MA, Clark MA, Hirst BH (2004) M cell targeting by lectins: 
a strategy for mucosal vaccination and drug delivery. Adv Drug 
Deliv Rev 56:511–525
Jennings RC (1968) Gibberellins as endogenous growth regulators in 
green and brown algae. Planta 80:34-42
Jennings RC (1969) Cytokinins as endogenous growth regulators in 
the algae Ecklonia (Phaeophyta) and Hypnea (Rhodophyta). Aust 
J Biol Sci 22:621–628
Jia XD, Kuang XC, Pang H, Tang GF, Yu YH (2008) The effects of 
polysaccharide from Spirulina platensis on proliferation of BEL 
7404 cells. Guangxi Med J 30:1122–1124
Jones MR, Pinto E, Torres MA, Dörr F, Mazur-Marzec H, Szubert 
K, Janssen EML (2021) CyanoMetDB, a comprehensive public 
database of secondary metabolites from cyanobacteria. Water Res 
196:117017
Joshi V , Bharadvaja N (2023) Current prospects and clinical status 
of microalgae derived chemotherapeutics. Rev Bras Farmacogn 
33:445–470
Jüttner F (2001) Liberation of 5,8,11,14,17-eicosapentaenoic acid and 
other polyunsaturated fatty acids from lipids as a grazer defense 
reaction in epilithic diatom biofilms. J Phycol 37:744–755
Kaczmarzyk D, Fulda M (2010) Fatty acid activation in cyanobacte -
ria mediated by acyl-acyl carrier protein synthetase enables fatty 
acid recycling. Plant Physiol 152:1598–1610
Kageyama H, Waditee-Sirisattha R (2018) Mycosporine-like amino 
acids as multifunctional secondary metabolites in cyanobacteria: 
From biochemical to application aspects. Stud Nat Prod Chem 
59:153–194
Kahn A, Oliveira P, Cuau M, Leão PN (2023) Incorporation, fate, and 
turnover of free fatty acids in cyanobacteria. FEMS Microbiol 
Rev 47:15
Kanekiyo K, Lee JB, Hayashi K, Takenaka H, Hayakawa Y , Endo S, 
Hayashi T (2005) Isolation of an antiviral polysaccharide, nos -
toflan, from a terrestrial cyanobacterium, Nostoc flagelliforme. J 
Nat Prod 68:1037–1041
Kanekiyo K, Hayashi K, Takenaka H, Lee JB, Hayashi T (2007) Anti-
herpes simplex virus target of an acidic polysaccharide, nostoflan, 
from the edible blue-green alga Nostoc flagelliforme. Biol Pharm 
Bull 30:1573–1575
Kaneko T, Tabata S (1997) Complete genome structure of the uni -
cellular cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. Plant Cell 
Physiol 38:1171–1176
Kang HS, Santarsiero BD, Kim H, Krunic A, Shen Q, Swanson SM, 
Orjala J (2012) Merocyclophanes A and B, antiproliferative 
cyclophanes from the cultured terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc 
sp. Phytochemistry 79:109–115
Kannaujiya VK, Richa SRP (2014) Peroxide scavenging potential of 
ultraviolet-B-absorbing mycosporine-like amino acids isolated 
from a marine red alga Bryocladia sp. Front Environ Sci 2:26
Kanno M, Carroll AL, Atsumi S (2017) Global metabolic rewiring for 
improved CO2 fixation and chemical production in cyanobacteria. 
Nat Commun 8:14724
Karki N, Tiwari H, Tewari C, Rana A, Pandey N, Basak S, Sahoo NG 
(2020) Functionalized graphene oxide as a vehicle for targeted 
drug delivery and bioimaging applications. J Mater Chem B 
8:8116–8148
Karthikeyan N, Prasanna R, Nain L, Kaushik BD (2007) Evaluating 
the potential of plant growth promoting cyanobacteria as inocu -
lants for wheat. Eur J Soil Biol 43:23–30
Katajamaa M, Miettinen J, Orešič M (2006) MZmine: toolbox for pro-
cessing and visualization of mass spectrometry based molecular 
profile data. Bioinformatics 22:634–636
Kautsar SA, Blin K, Shaw S, Navarro-Muñoz JC, Terlouw BR, Van 
Der Hooft JJ, Van Santen JA, Tracanna V , Suarez Duran HG, Pas-
cal Andreu V , Selem-Mojica N (2020) MIBiG 2.0: a repository 
for biosynthetic gene clusters of known function. Nucleic Acids 
Res 48:D454–D458
Kazemi S, Kawaguchi S, Badr CE, Mattos DR, Ruiz-Saenz A, Serrill 
JD, Ishmael JE (2021) Targeting of HER/ErbB family proteins 
using broad spectrum Sec61 inhibitors coibamide A and apratoxin 
A. Biochem Pharmacol 183:114317
Keeling CI, Bohlmann J (2012) Plant terpenoids. Nat Products Chem 
Biol 15:127–134
Kehr JC, Dittmann E (2015) Biosynthesis and function of extracellular 
glycans in cyanobacteria. Life 5:164–180
Kenshole E, Herisse M, Michael M, Pidot SJ (2021) Natural product 
discovery through microbial genome mining. Curr Opin Chem 
Biol 60:47–54
Kentzer T, Mazur H (1991) Abscisic acid as an endogenous inhibitor 
of the marine diatom Coscinodiscus granii. Bot Mar 34:153–157
Kerry A, Laudenbach DE, Trick CG (2008) Influence of iron limita -
tion and nitrogen source on growth and siderophore production 
by cyanobacteria. J Phycol 24:566–571
Khalifa SA, Shedid ES, Saied EM, Jassbi AR, Jamebozorgi FH, Rateb 
ME, El-Seedi HR (2021) Cyanobacteria—from the oceans to 
the potential biotechnological and biomedical applications. Mar 
Drugs 19:241
Khan MF, Khan MT (2025) AI-driven enzyme engineering: emerging 
models and next-generation biotechnological applications. Mol -
ecules 31:45
Khan AH, Phan CS (2025) Recent advancement of cyanobactins and 
cyanobactin prenyltransferases from 2021 to 2024. Front Nat 
Prod 4:1616031
Khan F, Akhlaq A, Rasool MH, Srinuanpan S (2024) Cyanobacterial 
bioactive compounds: synthesis, extraction, and applications. 
Pharmaceutical and nutraceutical potential of cyanobacteria. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 215–243
Kharwar S, Mishra AK (2020) Unraveling the complexities underlying 
sulfur deficiency and starvation in the cyanobacterium Anabaena 
sp. PCC 7120. Environ Exp Bot 172:103966
Kharwar S, Mishra AK (2024) Decrypting the effect of sulfate stress on 
the cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 using physiological, 
proteome and transcript analysis in conjunction with bioinformat-
ics. Plant Stress. https:/ /doi.or g/10.10 16/j. stress.2024.100512
Kharwar S, Bhattacharjee S, Mishra AK (2022) Deciphering salinity 
tolerance in the cyanobacterium Anabaena sphaerica: an evalua-
tion of physiological and biochemical adjustments. Acta Physiol 
Plant 44:127
Kim S, Chen J, Cheng T, Gindulyte A, He J, He S, Li Q, Shoemaker 
BA, Thiessen PA, Yu B, Zaslavsky L (2025) PubChem 2025 
update. Nucleic Acids Res 53(D1):D1516–D1525
Kirby J, Keasling JD (2009) Biosynthesis of plant isoprenoids: per -
spectives for microbial engineering. Annu Rev Plant Biol 
60:335–355
Klisch M, Häder DP (2008) Mycosporine-like amino acids and marine 
toxins-the common and the different. Mar Drugs 6:147–163
Kobayashi M, Hirai N, Kurimura Y , Ohigashi H, Tsuji Y (1997) 
Abscisic acid-dependent algal morphogenesis in the unicel -
lular green alga Haematococcus pluvialis . Plant Growth Regul 
22:79–85
Köcher S, Resch S, Kessenbrock T, Schrapp L, Ehrmann M, Kaiser M 
(2020) From dolastatin 13 to cyanopeptolins, micropeptins, and 
lyngbyastatins: the chemical biology of Ahp-cyclodepsipeptides. 
Nat Prod Rep 37:163–174
Kohlhase M, Pohl P (1988) Saturated and unsaturated sterols of nitro-
gen-fixing blue-green algae (cyanobacteria). Phytochemistry 
27:1735-1740
Page 29 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Konícková R, Vanková K, Vaníková J, Vánová K, Muchová L, Sub -
hanová I, Zadinová M, Zelenka J, Dvorák A, Kolár M, Strnad H 
(2014) Anti-cancer effects of blue-green alga Spirulina platensis, 
a natural source of bilirubin-like tetrapyrrolic compounds. Ann 
Hepatol 13:273–283
Koskinen AM, Rapoport H (1985) Synthetic and conformational stud-
ies on anatoxin-a: a potent acetylcholine agonist. J Med Chem 
28:1301–1309
Krylova J, Kurashov E (2022) Potential applications of the low-molec-
ular-weight metabolome of Synechocystis aquatilis Sauvagea 
(Cyanophyceae: Merismopediaceae). Algal biotechnology. Else -
vier, pp 347–376
Kreslavsky VD, Kobzar EF, Muzafarov EN (1997) Effect of red radia-
tion, kinetin and linuron on growth and ethylene production in 
Chlorella. Biol Plant 39:427–430
Kuczyńska P, Jemioła‐Rzemińska M, Strzałka K (2024) Pigments in 
diatoms: light absorption and beyond. In: Diatom photosynthesis: 
from primary production to high‐value molecules. pp. 137–189.
Kulkarni G, Busset N, Molinaro A, Gargani D, Chaintreuil C, Silipo A, 
Giraud E, Newman DK (2015) Specific hopanoid classes differ -
entially affect free-living and symbiotic states of Bradyrhizobium 
diazoefficiens. Mbio 6:10–128
Kumar J, Parihar P, Singh R, Singh VP, Prasad SM (2016) UV-B 
induces biomass production and nonenzymatic antioxidant com -
pounds in three cyanobacteria. J Appl Phycol 28:131–140
Kumar V , Mondal S, Gupta A, Maurya PK, Sinha RP, Häder DP, 
Singh SP (2021) Light-dependent impact of salinity on the eco -
physiology of Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942: Genetic and 
comparative protein structure analyses of UV-absorbing myco -
sporine-like amino acids (MAAs) biosynthesis. Environ Exp Bot 
191:104620
Kumar A, Singh RP, Kumar I, Yadav P, Singh SK, Singh PK, Gupta 
RK, Singh SM, Kesawat MS, Saratale GD (2022) Algal metabo -
lites can be an immune booster against COVID-19 pandemic. 
Antioxidants 11:452
Kumar N, Singh H, Giri K, Kumar A, Joshi A, Yadav S, Singh R, Bisht 
S, Kumari R, Jeena N, Khairakpam R (2024) Physiological and 
molecular insights into the allelopathic effects on agroecosys -
tems under changing environmental conditions. Physiol Mol Biol 
Plants 30:417–433
Kumari M, Kumar R, Singh D, Bhatt S, Gupta M (2020) Physiological 
and genomic characterization of an exopolysaccharide-producing 
Weissella cibaria CH2 from cheese of the western Himalayas. 
Food Biosci 35:100570
Lalić D (2024) Cyanobacterial toxins: foes from the water. In: 
Ordóñez J (ed) Insights into algae-fundamentals, culture tech -
niques and biotechnological uses of microalgae and cyanobac -
teria. IntechOpen
La Camera S, Gouzerh G, Dhondt S, Hoffmann L, Fritig B, Legrand 
M, Heitz T (2004) Metabolic reprogramming in plant innate 
immunity: the contributions of phenylpropanoid and oxylipin 
pathways. Immunol Rev 198:267–284
Lau AF, Siedlecki J, Anleitner J, Patterson GM, Caplan FR, Moore RE 
(1993) Inhibition of reverse transcriptase activity by extracts of 
cultured blue-green algae (Cyanophyta). Planta Med 59:148–151
Le Bail A, Billoud B, Kowalczyk N, Kowalczyk M, Gicquel M, Le 
Panse S, Stewart S, Scornet D, Cock JM, Ljung K, Charrier B 
(2010) Auxin metabolism and function in the multicellular brown 
alga Ectocarpus siliculosus. Plant Physiol 153:128–144
Leao PN, Engene N, Antunes A, Gerwick WH, Vasconcelos V (2012) 
The chemical ecology of cyanobacteria. Nat Prod Rep 29:372–391
Leao PN, Costa M, Ramos V , Pereira AR, Fernandes VC, Domingues 
VF, Martins R (2013) Antitumor activity of hierridin B, a cya -
nobacterial secondary metabolite found in both filamentous and 
unicellular marine strains. PLoS ONE 8:e69562
Leão PN, Martins TP, Abt K, Reis JP, Figueiredo S, Castelo-Branco 
R, Freitas S (2023) Incorporation and modification of fatty acids 
in cyanobacterial natural products biosynthesis. Chem Commun 
59:4436–4446
Lee JB, Srisomporn P, Hayashi K, Tanaka T, Sankawa U, Hayashi T 
(2001) Effects of structural modification of calcium spirulan, a 
sulfated polysaccharide from Spirulina platensis , on antiviral 
activity. Chem Pharm Bull 49:108–110
Lee JM, Lee H, Kang S, Park WJ (2016) Fatty acid desaturases, poly-
unsaturated fatty acid regulation, and biotechnological advances. 
Nutrients 8:23
Lee HJ, Lee J, Lee SM, Um Y , Kim Y , Sim SJ, Choi JH, Woo HM 
(2017) Direct conversion of CO 2 to a-farnesene using metaboli -
cally engineered Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. J Agric 
Food Chem 65:10424–10428
Lei L, Lai S, Liu W, Li Y , Zhang H (2024) Cylindrospermopsin-pro-
ducing and non-cylindrospermopsin. In: Cyanobacterial diver -
sity: environmental effect and ecosystem functioning, pp. 18
Levendosky K, Mizenina O, Martinelli E, Jean-Pierre N, Kizima L, 
Rodriguez A, Kleinbeck K, Bonnaire T, Robbiani M, Zydowsky 
TM, O’Keefe BR, Fernández-Romero JA (2015) Griffithsin 
and carrageenan combination to target Herpes simplex virus 
2 and Human papillomavirus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 
59:7290–7298
Levin EY , Bloch K (1964) Absence of sterols in blue-green algae. 
Nature 202:90–91
Li Y , Zhang X, Chen G, Wei D, Chen F (2008) Algal lectins for potential 
prevention of HIV transmission. Curr Med Chem 15:1096–1104
Li X, Shen CR, Liao JC (2014) Isobutanol production as an alternative 
metabolic sink to rescue the growth deficiency of the glycogen 
mutant of Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Photosynth Res 
120:301–310
Li Y , Naman CB, Alexander KL, Guan H, Gerwick WH (2020) The 
chemistry, biochemistry and pharmacology of marine natural 
products from Leptolyngbya, a chemically endowed genus of 
cyanobacteria. Mar Drugs 18:508
Li Y , Zhang X, Chen G, Wei D, Chen F (2008) Algal lectins for potential 
prevention of HIV transmission. Curr Med Chem 15:1096–1104
Li M, Wang Y , Xiao J, Yan X, Liu B (2023) Allelopathic inhibition 
effects and mechanism of phenolic acids to Microcystis aerugi-
nosa. Environ Sci Pollut Res 30:45388–45397
Liang J, Moore RE, Moher ED, Munroe JE, Al-awar RS, Hay DA, 
Corbett TH (2005) Cryptophycins-309, 249 and other cryptophy-
cin analogs: preclinical efficacy studies with mouse and human 
tumors. Investig New Drugs 23:213–224
Liang C, Zhao F, Wei W, Wen Z, Qin S (2006) Carotenoid biosynthesis 
in cyanobacteria: structural and evolutionary scenarios based on 
comparative genomics. Int J Biol Sci 2:197
Liao B, Zheng J, Xia C, Chen X, Xu Q, Duan B (2023) The potential, 
challenges, and prospects of the genus Spirulina polysaccharides 
as future multipurpose biomacromolecules. Intl J Biol Macromol 
253:127482
Liao L, Xie M, Zheng X, Zhou Z, Deng Z, Gao J (2025) Molecular 
insights fast-tracked: AI in biosynthetic pathway research. Nat 
Prod Rep 42(5):911–936
Liu X, Sheng J, Curtiss R III (2011) Fatty acid production in 
genetically modified cyanobacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
108:6899–6904
Liu H, Liu Y , Wang Z, Xing X, Maguire AR, Luesch H, Ye T (2013) 
Total synthesis and biological evaluation of grassypeptolide A. 
Chem Eur J 19:6774–6784
Lobner D, Piana PMT, Salous AK, Peoples RW (2007) β-N-
methylamino-L-alanine enhances neurotoxicity through multiple 
mechanisms. Neurobiol Dis 25:360–366
Lopes D, Aveiro SS, Conde T, Rey F, Couto D, Melo T, Moreira AS, 
Domingues MR (2023) Algal lipids: structural diversity, analysis 
282 Page 30 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
and applications. Functional ingredients from algae for foods and 
nutraceuticals. Woodhead Publishing, pp 335–396
Lu Y , Tarkowská D, Turečková V , Luo T, Xin Y , Li J, Wang Q, Jiao 
N, Strnad M, Xu J (2014) Antagonistic roles of abscisic acid and 
cytokinin during response to nitrogen depletion in oleaginous 
microalga Nannochloropsis oceanica expand the evolutionary 
breadth of phytohormone function. Plant J 80:52–68
Lu X, Cao M, Ma M, Wu Y , Qu M, Du F, Ji R, Duan M, Dong L, Liu K, 
Zhang X (2025) Accelerating enzyme engineering with artificial 
intelligence in biocatalysis: challenges and opportunities. Food 
Bioprocess Eng 4:589–611
Luesch H, Moore RE, Paul VJ, Mooberry SL, Corbett TH (2001) Iso-
lation of dolastatin 10 from the marine cyanobacterium Symploca 
species VP642 and total stereochemistry and biological evalua -
tion of its analogue symplostatin 1. J Nat Prod 64:907–910
Luesch H, Chanda SK, Raya RM, DeJesus PD, Orth AP, Walker JR, 
Schultz PG (2006) A functional genomics approach to the mode 
of action of apratoxin A. Nat Chem Biol 2:158–167
Maberly SC, Gontero B (2022) Blue planet, red and green photosyn -
thesis: productivity and carbon cycling in aquatic ecosystems. 
John Wiley & Sons
MacKintosh C, Beattie KA, Klumpp S, Cohen P, Codd GA (1990) 
Cyanobacterial microcystin-LR is a potent and specific inhibitor 
of protein phosphatases 1 and 2A from both mammals and higher 
plants. FEBS Lett 264:187–192
Mader JS, Hoskin DW (2006) Cationic antimicrobial peptides as novel 
cytotoxic agents for cancer treatment. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 
15:933–946
Mahedi MRA (2022) Current status and prospects of microalgae bio -
active compounds for anticancer and antiviral actions. Biomater 
J 1:28–36
Mahmood NA, Carmichael WW (1986) Paralytic shellfish poisons 
produced by the freshwater cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon flos-
aquae NH-5. Toxicon 24:175–186
Maltsev Y , Maltseva K (2021) Fatty acids of microalgae: diversity and 
applications. Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol 20:515–547
Manikandan A, Suresh Babu P, Shyamalagowri S, Kamaraj M, Muth-
ukumaran P, Aravind J (2022) Emerging role of microalgae in 
heavy metal bioremediation. J Basic Microbiol 62:330–347
Manochkumar J, Doss CGP, Efferth T, Ramamoorthy S (2022) Tumor 
preventive properties of selected marine pigments against colon 
and breast cancer. Algal Res 61:102594
Martin-Creuzburg D, von Elert E (2009) Good food versus bad food: 
the role of sterols and polyunsaturated fatty acids in determin -
ing growth and reproduction of Daphnia magna . Aquat Ecol 
43:943–950
Marinho-Soriano E, Bourret E (2003) Effects of season on the yield 
and quality of agar from Gracilaria species (Gracilariaceae, Rho-
dophyta). Bioresour Technol 90:329–333
Maršálek B, Zahradníčková H, Hronková M (1992) Extracellular 
abscisic acid produced by cyanobacteria under salt stress. J Plant 
Physiol 139:506–508
Maor R (2012) Compositions and methods for increasing oil content in 
algae. US Patent Application 13:262–637
Maschmeyer T, Luque R, Selva M (2020) Upgrading of marine (fish 
and crustaceans) biowaste for high added-value molecules and 
bio (nano)-materials. Chem Soc Rev 49:4527–4563
Matsunaga S, Moore RE, Niemczura WP, Carmichael WW (1989) 
Anatoxin-a(s), a potent anticholinesterase from Anabaena flos-
aquae. J Am Chem Soc 111:8021–8023
Matzanke BF (1991) Structures, coordination chemistry and functions 
of microbial iron chelates. In: Winkelmann G (ed) CRC hand -
book of microbial iron chelates. CRC Press, Boston, pp 15–64
Mazard S, Penesyan A, Ostrowski M, Paulsen IT, Egan S (2016) Tiny 
microbes with a big impact: the role of cyanobacteria and their 
metabolites in shaping our future. Mar Drugs 14:97
Mazhar S, Cohen JD, Hasnain S (2013) Auxin producing non-hetero -
cystous cyanobacteria and their impact on the growth and endoge-
nous auxin homeostasis of wheat. J Basic Microbiol 53:996–1003
Mazur H, Konop A, Synak R (2001) Indole-3-acetic acid in the culture 
medium of two axenic green microalgae. J Appl Phycol 13:35–42
Medema MH, Blin K, Cimermancic P, De Jager V , Zakrzewski P, Fis-
chbach MA, Weber T, Takano E, Breitling R (2011) antiSMASH: 
rapid identification, annotation and analysis of secondary metab -
olite biosynthesis gene clusters in bacterial and fungal genome 
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 39:W339–W346
Medina RA, Goeger DE, Hills P, Mooberry SL, Huang N, Romero 
LI, McPhail KL (2008) Coibamide A, a potent antiproliferative 
cyclic depsipeptide from the Panamanian marine cyanobacterium 
Leptolyngbya sp. J Am Chem Soc 130:6324–6325
Mendoza FJ, Espino PS, Cann KL, Bristow N, McCrea K, Los 
MJ (2005) Anti-tumor chemotherapy utilizing peptide-based 
approaches-apoptotic pathways, kinases, and proteasome as tar -
gets. Arch Immunol Ther Exp 53:47–60
Metcalf JS, Codd GA (2012) Cyanotoxins. In: Whitton BA (ed) Ecol-
ogy of Cyanobacteria II. Springer, Berlin, pp 651–675
Minić S (2021) Bioactive properties of Spirulina-derived phycobilip -
roteins and phycobilins. Biologia Serbica 43
Mimouni V , Ulmann L, Pasquet V et al. (2012) The potential of micro-
algae for the production of bioactive molecules of pharmaceutical 
interest. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 13:2733–2750
Mishra R, Kaur P, Soni R, Madan A, Agarwal P, Singh G (2024) 
Decoding the photoprotection strategies and manipulating cya -
nobacterial photoprotective metabolites, mycosporine-like amino 
acids, for next-generation sunscreens. Plant Physiol Biochem 
212:108744
Misra S, Kaushik BD (1989) Growth promoting substances of cyano -
bacteria. II. Detection of amino acids, sugars and auxins
Mochimaru M, Masukawa H, Takaichi S (2005) The cyanobacterium 
Anabaena sp. PCC 7120 has two distinct β-carotene ketolases: 
CrtO for echinenone and CrtW for ketomyxol synthesis. FEBS 
Let 579:6111–6114
Mogany T, Swalaha FM, Kumari S, Bux F (2018) Elucidating the role 
of nutrients in C- phycocyanin production by the halophilic cya -
nobacterium Euhalothece sp. J Appl Phycol 30:2259–2271
Mohamed Abdoul-Latif F, Ainane A, Houmed Aboubaker I, Merito Ali 
A, Mohamed H, Jutur PP, Ainane T (2024) Unlocking the Green 
Gold: exploring the cancer treatment and the other therapeutic 
potential of Fucoxanthin derivatives from microalgae. Pharma -
ceuticals 17:960
Mohareb RM, Schatz J (2011) Anti-tumor and anti-leishmanial evalu-
ations of 1,3,4-oxadiazine, pyran derivatives derived from cross-
coupling reactions of β-bromo-6H-1,3,4-oxadiazine derivatives. 
Bioorg Med Chem 19:2707–2713
Montalbán-López M, Scott TA, Ramesh S, Rahman IR, Van Heel AJ, 
Viel JH, Bandarian V , Dittmann E, Genilloud O, Goto Y , Burgos 
MJ (2021) New developments in RiPP discovery, enzymology 
and engineering. Nat Prod Rep 38:130–239
Muller-Feuga A (2000) The role of microalgae in aquaculture: situa -
tion and trends. J Appl Phycol 12:527–534
Mullowney MW, Duncan KR, Elsayed SS, Garg N, van der Hooft JJ, 
Martin NI, Meijer D, Terlouw BR, Biermann F, Blin K, Durairaj 
J (2023) Artificial intelligence for natural product drug discovery. 
Nat Rev Drug Discov 22:895–916
Nadal NGM (1971) Sterols of Spirulina maxima . Phytochemistry 
10:2537–2538
Nagarajan D, Varjani S, Lee DJ, Chang JS (2021) Sustainable aquacul-
ture and animal feed from microalgae–nutritive value and techno-
functional components. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 150:111549
Nakamura H, Kobayashi JI, Hirata Y (1982) Separation of mycospo -
rine-like amino acids in marine organisms using reversed-phase 
Page 31 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
high-performance liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr A 
250:113–118
Namikoshi M, Murakami T, Watanabe MF, Oda T, Yamada J, Tsu -
jimura S, Nagai H, Oishi S (2003) Simultaneous production of 
homoanatoxin-a, anatoxin-a, and a new non-toxic 4-hydroxyho -
moanatoxin-a by the cyanobacterium Raphidiopsis mediterranea 
Skuja. Toxicon 42:533–538
Nandagopal P, Steven AN, Chan LW, Rahmat Z, Jamaluddin H, Mohd 
Noh NI (2021) Bioactive metabolites produced by cyanobacteria 
for growth adaptation and their pharmacological properties. Biol-
ogy (Basel) 10:1061
Nawaz T, Gu L, Fahad S, Saud S, Jiang Z, Hassan S, Zhou R (2023) A 
comprehensive review of the therapeutic potential of cyanobacte-
rial marine bioactives: unveiling the hidden treasures of the sea. 
Food Energy Secur 12:e495
Neilands JB (1981) Microbial iron transport compounds (sidero -
phores) as chelating agents. In: Martell AE, Anderson WF, Bad -
man DG (eds) Development of iron chelators for clinical use. 
Elsevier-North Holland, New York, pp 13–31
Nes WD (2011) Biosynthesis of cholesterol and other sterols. Chem 
Rev 111:6423–6451
Neumann C, Bain P, Shaw G (2007) Studies of the comparative in vitro 
toxicology of the cyanobacterial metabolite deoxycylindrosper -
mopsin. J Toxicol Environ Health A 70:1679–1686
Nguyen MT, Hegarty AF, Elguero J (1985) Can 1,2,3-oxadiazole be 
stable? Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 24:713–715
Nisar N, Li L, Lu S, Khin NC, Pogson BJ (2015) Carotenoid metabo -
lism in plants. Mole Plant 8:68–82
Nishimura M, Koyama T (1977) The occurrence of stanols in vari -
ous living organisms and the behavior of sterols in contemporary 
sediments. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 41:379–385
Noushahi HA, Khan AH, Noushahi UF, Hussain M, Javed T, Zafar M, 
Shu S (2022) Biosynthetic pathways of triterpenoids and strate -
gies to improve their biosynthetic efficiency. Plant Growth Regu 
97:439–454
Nowruzi B, Sarvari G, Blanco S (2020) The cosmetic application of 
cyanobacterial secondary metabolites. Algal Res 49:101959
O’Keefe BR, Murad AM, Vianna GR, Ramessar K, Saucedo CJ, Wil-
son J, Rech EL (2015) Engineering soya bean seeds as a scal -
able platform to produce cyanovirin-N, a non-ARV microbicide 
against HIV . Plant Biotechnol J 13:884–892
Okeke ES, Nweze EJ, Chibuogwu CC, Anaduaka EG, Chukwudozie 
KI, Ezeorba TPC (2021) Aquatic phlorotannins and human 
health: bioavailability, toxicity, and future prospects. Nat Prod 
Commun 16:1934578X211056144.
Olowoyeye OS, Kanwar RS (2023) Water and food sustainability 
in the riparian countries of Lake Chad in Africa. Sustainability 
15:10009
Olson JA (1993) Molecular actions of carotenoids. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
691:156–166
Oren A, Gunde-Cimerman N (2007) Mycosporines and mycosporine-
like amino acids: UV protectants or multipurpose secondary 
metabolites? FEMS Microbiol Lett 269:1–10
Osborne NJ, Shaw GR (2008) Dermatitis associated with exposure to a 
marine cyanobacterium during recreational water exposure. BMC 
Dermatol 8:1–7
Osborne NJ, Shaw GR, Webb PM (2007) Health effects of recreational 
exposure to Moreton Bay, Australia waters during a Lyngbya 
majuscula bloom. Environ Int 33:309–314
Pagels F, Vasconcelos V , Guedes AC (2021) Carotenoids from cyano-
bacteria: biotechnological potential and optimization strategies. 
Biomolecules 11:735
Palko-Łabuz A, Kostrzewa-Susłow E, Janeczko T, Środa-Pomianek K, 
Poła A, Uryga A, Michalak K (2020) Cyclization of flavokawain 
B reduces its activity against human colon cancer cells. Hum Exp 
Toxicol 39:262–275
Paoletti C, Pushparaj B, Florenzano G, Capella P, Lercker G (1976) 
Unsaponifiable matter of green and blue‐green algal lipids as a 
factor of biochemical differentiation of their biomasses: I. Total 
unsaponifiable and hydrocarbon fraction. Lipids 11:258–265
Park WK, Yoo G, Moon M, Kim CW, Choi YE, Yang JW (2013) Phy-
tohormone supplementation significantly increases growth of 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii cultivated for biodiesel production. 
Appl Biochem Biotechnol 171:1128–1142
Pasquet V , Morisset P, Ihammouine S, Chepied A, Aumailley L, 
Berard JB, Picot L (2011) Antiproliferative activity of violaxan -
thin isolated from bioguided fractionation of Dunaliella tertio -
lecta extracts. Mar Drugs 9:819–831
Patel AK, Vadrale AP, Singhania RR, Michaud P, Pandey A, Chen SJ, 
Chen CW, Dong CD (2023) Algal polysaccharides: current status 
and future prospects. Phytochem Rev 4:1167–1196
Pathak J, Pandey A, Maurya PK, Rajneesh R, Sinha RP, Singh SP 
(2020) Cyanobacterial secondary metabolite scytonemin: a 
potential photoprotective and pharmaceutical compound. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci India Sect B Biol Sci 90:467–481
Pathak J, Mishra S, Kumari N, Pandey A, Jaiswal J, Gupta A, Sinha 
RP (2021) Bionanotechnology of cyanobacterial bioactive com -
pounds. Natural bioactive compounds. Academic Press, pp 
115–142
Pattanaik B, Lindberg P (2015) Terpenoids and their biosynthesis in 
cyanobacteria. Life 5:269–293
Patterson JT (1971) Microbiological assessment of surfaces. Int J Food 
Sci Technol 6:63–72
Peeri NC, Shrestha N, Rahman MS, Zaki R, Tan Z, Bibi S, Baghban -
zadeh M, Aghamohammadi N, Zhang W, Haque U (2020) The 
SARS, MERS and novel coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemics, the 
newest and biggest global health threats: what lessons have we 
learned? Int J Epidemiol 49:717–726
Pereira AG, Otero P, Echave J, Carreira-Casais A, Chamorro F, Col -
lazo N, Prieto MA (2021) Xanthophylls from the sea: algae as 
source of bioactive carotenoids. Mar Drugs 19:188
Perry GJ, Gillan FT, Johns RB (1978) Lipid composition of a prochlo-
rophyte 1. J Phycol 14:369–371
Pettit GR, Kamano Y , Herald CL, Tuinman AA, Boettner FE, Kizu 
H, Bontems RJ (1987) The isolation and structure of a remark -
able marine animal antineoplastic constituent: dolastatin 10. J Am 
Chem Soc 109:6883–6885
Pierobon SC, Cheng X, Graham PJ, Nguyen B, Karakolis EG, Sin -
ton D (2018) Emerging microalgae technology: a review. Sustain 
Energy Fuels 2:13–38
Piironen V , Lindsay DG, Miettinen TA, Toivo J, Lampi AM (2000) 
Plant sterols: biosynthesis, biological function and their impor -
tance to human nutrition. J Sci Food Agric 80:939–966
Piotrowska-Niczyporuk A, Bajguz A (2014) The effect of natural and 
synthetic auxins on the growth, metabolite content and antioxi -
dant response of green alga Chlorella vulgaris (Trebouxiophy-
ceae). Plant Growth Regul 73:57–66
Pluskal T, Castillo S, Villar-Briones A, Orešič M (2010) MZmine 2: 
modular framework for processing, visualizing, and analyzing 
mass spectrometry-based molecular profile data. BMC Bioinfor -
matics 11:395
Portwich A, Garcia-Pichel F (2003) Biosynthetic pathway of myco -
sporines (mycosporine-like amino acids) in the cyanobacterium 
Chlorogloeopsis sp. strain PCC 6912. Phycologia 42:384–392
Poynton EF, van Santen JA, Pin M, Contreras MM, McMann E, Parra 
J, Showalter B, Zaroubi L, Duncan KR, Linington RG (2025) The 
Natural Products Atlas 3.0: extending the database of microbially 
derived natural products. Nucleic Acids Res 53(D1):D691–D699
Prabhu S, Vijayakumar S, Praseetha P (2022) Cyanobacterial metabo-
lites as novel drug candidates in corona viral therapies: a review. 
Chronic Dis Transl Med 8:172–183
282 Page 32 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Prasanna R, Sood A, Jaiswal P, Nayak S, Gupta V , Chaudhary V , Joshi 
M, Natarajan C (2010) Rediscovering cyanobacteria as valu -
able sources of bioactive compounds. Appl Biochem Microbiol 
46:119–134
Procházková T, Sychrová E, Javůrková B, Večerková J, Kohoutek J, 
Lepšová-Skácelová O, Bláha L, Hilscherová K (2017) Phytoes -
trogens and sterols in waters with cyanobacterial blooms-analyti-
cal methods and estrogenic potencies. Chemosphere 170:104–112
Pugh N, Ross SA, ElSohly HN, ElSohly MA, Pasco DS (2001) Isola -
tion of three high molecular weight polysaccharide preparations 
with potent immunostimulatory activity from Spirulina platensis, 
Aphanizomenon flos-aquae and Chlorella pyrenoidosa . Planta 
Med 67:737–742
Pugh ND, Edwall D, Lindmark L, Kousoulas KG, Iyer A V , Haron 
MH, Pasco DS (2015) Oral administration of a Spirulina extract 
enriched for Braun-type lipoproteins protects mice against influ -
enza A (H1N1) virus infection. Phytomedicine 22:271–276
Qamar H, Hussain K, Soni A, Khan A, Hussain T, Chénais B (2021) 
Cyanobacteria as natural therapeutics and pharmaceutical poten -
tial: role in antitumor activity and as nanovectors. Molecules 
26:247
Quintero-Pacheco N, Vásquez-García A, Polanía AM, Londoño-Her -
nandez L (2024) Potential applications of bioactive compounds 
from arid zone microorganisms. Exploration and valorization 
of natural resources from arid zones. Apple Academic Press, pp 
65–100
Randhir A, Laird DW, Maker G, Trengove R, Moheimani NR (2020) 
Microalgae: a potential sustainable commercial source of sterols. 
Algal Res 46:101772
Rangel M, Falkenberg M (2015) An overview of the marine natural 
products in clinical trials and on the market. J Coast Life Med 
3:421–428
Rasmussen HE, Blobaum KR, Park YK, Ehlers SJ, Lu F, Lee JY 
(2008) Lipid extract of Nostoc commune var. sphaeroides Küz-
ing, a blue-green alga, inhibits the activation of sterol regulatory 
element binding proteins in HepG2 cells. J Nutr 138:476–481
Rastogi RP, Madamwar D (2016) Cyanobacteria synthesize their own 
UV-sunscreens for photoprotection. Bioenergetics 5:138
Rastogi RP, Sinha RP (2009) Biotechnological and industrial signifi -
cance of cyanobacterial secondary metabolites. Biotechnol Adv 
27:521–539
Rastogi RP, Richa SRP, Singh SP, Häder DP (2010) Photoprotective 
compounds from marine organisms. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 
37:537–558
Rastogi RP, Sinha RP, Incharoensakdi A (2013) Partial characteriza -
tion, UV-induction and photoprotective function of sunscreen 
pigment, scytonemin from Rivularia sp. HKAR-4. Chemosphere 
93:1874–1878
Rastogi RP, Sonani RR, Madamwar D (2014) The high-energy radia -
tion protectant extracellular sheath pigment scytonemin and 
its reduced counterpart in the cyanobacterium Scytonema sp. 
R77DM. Bioresour Technol 171:396–400
Rastogi RP, Sonani RR, Madamwar D (2015) Cyanobacterial sun -
screen scytonemin: role in photoprotection and biomedical 
research. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 176:1551–1563
Rautela A, Kumar S (2022) Engineering plant family TPS into cya -
nobacterial host for terpenoids production. Plant Cell Rep 
41:1791–1803
Reichert J, Pechon P, Tartat A, Dunn MK (2010) Development trends 
for peptide therapeutics: a comprehensive quantitative analysis 
of peptide therapeutics in clinical development. Pept Ther Found 
1:1–11
Reichert M, Bergmann SM, Hwang J, Buchholz R, Lindenberger C 
(2017) Antiviral activity of exopolysaccharides from Arthrospira 
platensis against koi herpesvirus. J Fish Dis 40:1441–1450
Reitz RC, Hamilton JG (1968) The isolation and identification of two 
sterols from two species of blue-green algae. Comp Biochem 
Physiol 25:401–416
Rippka R, Waterbury J, Cohen-Bazire G (1974) A cyanobacterium 
which lacks thylakoids. Arch Microbiol 100:419–436
Robles-Bañuelos B, Durán-Riveroll LM, Rangel-López E, Pérez-
López HI, González-Maya L (2022) Marine cyanobacteria as 
sources of lead anticancer compounds: a review of families of 
metabolites with cytotoxic, antiproliferative, and antineoplastic 
effects. Molecules 27:4814
Rogowska A, Szakiel A (2020) The role of sterols in plant response to 
abiotic stress. Phytochem Rev 19:1525–1538
Rothrock MJ Jr, Garcia-Pichel F (2005) Microbial diversity of ben -
thic mats along a tidal desiccation gradient. Environ Microbiol 
7:593–601
Ruzicka L (1953) The isoprene rule and the biogenesis of terpenic 
compounds. Experientia 9:357–367
Saad MH, El-Fakharany EM, Salem MS, Sidkey NM (2022) The use 
of cyanobacterial metabolites as natural medical and biotechno -
logical tools. J Biomol Struct Dyn 40:2828–2850
Sanmukh S, Bruno B, Ramakrishnan U, Khairnar K, Swaminathan S, 
Paunikar W (2014) Bioactive compounds derived from microal -
gae showing antimicrobial activities. J Aquac Res Dev 5:1–4
Sato Y , Okuyama S, Hori K (2007) Primary structure and carbohydrate 
binding specificity of a potent anti-HIV lectin isolated from the 
filamentous cyanobacterium Oscillatoria agardhii. J Biol Chem 
282:11021–11029
Saw JH, Schatz M, Brown MV , Kunkel DD, Foster JS, Shick H, 
Donachie SP (2013) Cultivation and complete genome sequenc -
ing of Gloeobacter kilaueensis sp. nov., from a lava cave in 
Kīlauea Caldera, Hawai’i. PLoS ONE 8:e76376
Scherer S, Chen TW, Böger P (1988) A new UV-A/B protecting pig -
ment in the terrestrial cyanobacterium Nostoc commune . Plant 
Physiol 88:1055–1057
Schmidt EW, Nelson JT, Rasko DA, Sudek S, Eisen JA, Haygood MG, 
Ravel J (2005) Patellamide A and C biosynthesis by a microcin-
like pathway in Prochloron didemni, the cyanobacterial symbiont 
of Lissoclinum patella. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102:7315–7320
Seckbach J, Ikan R (1972) Sterols and chloroplast structure of Cyanid-
ium caldarium. Plant Physiol 49:457
Seino Y , Miki T, Kiyonari H, Abe T, Fujimoto W, Kimura K, Seino S 
(2008) Isx participates in the maintenance of vitamin A metabo -
lism by regulation of β-carotene 15, 15′-monooxygenase (Bcmo1) 
expression. J Biol Chem 283:4905–4911
Semenov SG, Makarova MV (2011) 1,2,3-Oxadiazole rings in the aro-
matic compounds: a quantum-chemical investigation. Russ J Gen 
Chem 81:1555–1557
Sergeeva E, Liaimer A, Bergman B (2002) Evidence for production of 
the phytohormone indole-3-acetic acid by cyanobacteria. Planta 
215:229–238
Shah MMR, Liang Y , Cheng JJ, Daroch M (2016) Astaxanthin-produc-
ing green microalga Haematococcus pluvialis: from single cell to 
high value commercial products. Front Plant Sci 7:531
Shahidi F, Zhong Y (2010) Novel antioxidants in food quality preserva-
tion and health promotion. Eur J Lipid Sci Technol 112:930–940
Shalaby EA, Dubey NK (2018) Polysaccharides from cyanobacteria: 
response to biotic and abiotic stress and their antiviral activity. 
Indian J Mar Sci 47:21–33
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin 
N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T (2003) Cytoscape: a software envi -
ronment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction net -
works. Genome Res 13:2498–2504
Sharaf M, Amara A, Aboul-Enein A, Helmi S, Ballot A, Astani A, 
Schnitzler P (2010) Molecular authentication and characteriza -
tion of the antiherpetic activity of the cyanobacterium Arthro-
spira fusiformis. Pharmazie 65:132–136
Page 33 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Shiels K, Tsoupras A, Lordan R, Zabetakis I, Murray P, Saha SK 
(2022) Anti-inflammatory and antithrombotic properties of 
polar lipid extracts, rich in unsaturated fatty acids, from the Irish 
marine cyanobacterium Spirulina subsalsa. Journal of Functional 
Foods 94:105124
Shih SR, Tsai KN, Li YS, Chueh CC, Chan EC (2003) Inhibition 
of enterovirus 71-induced apoptosis by allophycocyanin iso -
lated from a blue-green alga Spirulina platensis . J Med Virol 
70:119–125
Shih PM, Wu D, Latifi A, Axen SD, Fewer DP, Talla E, Calteau A, Cai 
F, Tandeau de Marsac N, Rippka R, Herdman M (2013) Improv-
ing the coverage of the cyanobacterial phylum using diversity-
driven genome sequencing. Proc Natl Acad Sci 110:1053–1058
Shukla G, Sharma G (2024) A unique bacterial family strikes again! 
Trends Microbiol 32:1153–1155
Sieroslawska A, Rymuszka A (2015) Cylindrospermopsin induces oxi-
dative stress and genotoxic effects in the fish CLC cell line. J Appl 
Toxicol 35:426–433
Silva-Stenico ME, Silva CSP, Lorenzi AS, Shishido TK, Etchegaray A, 
Lira SP, Moraes LAB, Fiore MF (2011) Non-ribosomal peptides 
produced by Brazilian cyanobacterial isolates with antimicrobial 
activity. Microbiol Res 166:161–175
Silva-Stenico ME, Silva CSP, Lorenzi AS, Shishido TK, Etchegaray 
A, Lira SP, Fiore MF (2011) Non-ribosomal peptides produced 
by Brazilian cyanobacterial isolates with antimicrobial activity. 
Microbiol Res 166:161–175
Silvestro D, Andersen TG, Schaller H, Jensen PE (2013) Plant ste -
rol metabolism. Δ7-sterol-C5-desaturase (STE1/DWARF7), Δ5, 
7-sterol-Δ7-reductase (DWARF5) and Δ24-sterol-Δ24-reductase 
(DIMINUTO/DWARF1) show multiple subcellular localizations 
in Arabidopsis thaliana (Heynh) L. PLoS ONE 8:e56429
Singh B, Sharma RA (2015) Plant terpenes: defense responses, phy -
logenetic analysis, regulation and clinical applications. 3 Biotech 
5:129-151
Singh SC, Sinha RP, Hader DP (2002) Role of lipids and fatty acids 
in stress tolerance in cyanobacteria. Acta Protozool 41:297–308
Singh UP, Sarma BK, Singh DP (2003) Effect of plant growth-promot-
ing rhizobacteria and culture filtrate of Sclerotium rolfsii on phe-
nolic and salicylic acid contents in chickpea ( Cicer arietinum). 
Curr Microbiol 46:131–140
Singh S, Kate BN, Banerjee UC (2005) Bioactive compounds from 
cyanobacteria and microalgae: an overview. Crit Rev Biotechnol 
25:73–95
Singh SP, Häder DP, Sinha RP (2010) Cyanobacteria and ultraviolet 
radiation (UVR) stress: mitigation strategies. Ageing Res Rev 
9:79–90
Singh RK, Tiwari SP, Rai AK, Mohapatra TM (2011) Cyanobacteria: 
an emerging source for drug discovery. J Antibiot 64:401–412
Singh JS, Kumar A, Rai AN, Singh DP (2016) Cyanobacteria: a pre -
cious bio-resource in agriculture, ecosystem, and environmental 
sustainability. Front Microbiol 7:529
Singh R, Parihar P, Singh M, Bajguz A, Kumar J, Singh S, Singh VP, 
Prasad SM (2017) Uncovering potential applications of cyano -
bacteria and algal metabolites in biology, agriculture and medi -
cine: current status and future prospects. Front Microbiol 8:515
Singh A, Čížková M, Bišová K, Vitova M (2021) Exploring myco -
sporine-like amino acids (MAAs) as safe and natural protective 
agents against UV-induced skin damage. Antioxidants Basel 
10:683
Singh U, Gandhi HA, Bhattacharya NJ, Tandon R, Tiwari GL, Tandon 
R (2023b) Cyanometabolites: molecules with immense antiviral 
potential. Arch Microbiol 205:164
Singh VK, Jha S, Rana P, Mishra S, Kumari N, Singh SC, Sinha RP 
(2023c) Resilience and mitigation strategies of cyanobacteria 
under ultraviolet radiation stress. Int J Mol Sci 24:12381
Sinha RP, Singh SP, Häder DP (2007) Database on mycosporines and 
mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) in fungi, cyanobacteria, 
macroalgae, phytoplankton and animals. J Photochem Photobiol 
B Biol 89:29–35
Singh SP, Kumari S, Rastogi RP, Singh KL, Sinha RP (2008) Myco -
sporine-like amino acids (MAAs): chemical structure, biosynthe-
sis and significance as UV-absorbing/screening compounds
Singh P, Srivastava A, Shukla E (2023) Response of cyanobacteria 
during abiotic stress with special reference to membrane biology: 
an overview. In: Cyanobacterial biotechnology in the 21st cen -
tury. pp. 63–84.
Skinnider MA, Johnston CW, Gunabalasingam M, Merwin NJ, 
Kieliszek AM, MacLellan RJ, Li H, Ranieri MR, Webster AL, 
Cao MP, Pfeifle A (2020) Comprehensive prediction of second -
ary metabolite structure and biological activity from microbial 
genome sequences. Nat Commun 11:6058
Skinnider MA, Wang F, Pasin D, Greiner R, Foster LJ, Dalsgaard PW, 
Wishart DS (2021) A deep generative model enables automated 
structure elucidation of novel psychoactive substances. Nat Mach 
Intell 3:973–984
Smith CD, Zhang X (1996) Mechanism of action of cryptophycin: 
interaction with the Vinca alkaloid domain of tubulin ( ∗). J Bio 
Chem 271:6192–6198
Solomons NW, Bulux J (1993) Plant sources of provitamin A and 
human nutriture. Nutr Rev 51:199–204
Solanki HK (2020) Chemical diversity of some benthic cyanobacteria 
from French Polynesia and New Caledonia. Doctoral dissertation, 
NUI Galway
Soohoo AM, Cogan DP, Brodsky KL, Khosla C (2024) Structure and 
mechanisms of assembly-line polyketide synthases. Annu Rev 
Biochem 93:471–498
Sorokina M, Merseburger P, Rajan K, Yirik MA, Steinbeck C (2021) 
COCONUT online: collection of open natural products database. 
J Cheminform 13(1):2
Srivastava R, Prajapati R, Kanda T, Yadav S, Singh N, Yadav S, Atri N 
(2022) Phycochemistry and bioactivity of cyanobacterial second-
ary metabolites. Mol Biol Rep 49:11149–11167
Steinhoff FS, Karlberg M, Graeve M, Wulff A (2014) Cyanobacteria 
in Scandinavian coastal waters-a potential source for biofuels and 
fatty acids? Algal Res 5:42–51
Steunou AS, Bhaya D, Bateson MM, Melendrez MC, Ward DM, 
Brecht E, Grossman AR (2006) In situ analysis of nitrogen fixa -
tion and metabolic switching in unicellular thermophilic cyano -
bacteria inhabiting hot spring microbial mats. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
103:2398–2403
Stevenson CS, Capper EA, Roshak AK, Marquez B, Grace K, Gerwick 
WH, Jacobs RS, Marshall LA (2002) Scytonemin-a marine natu-
ral product inhibitor of kinases key in hyperproliferative inflam -
matory diseases. Inflamm Res 51:112
Stewart I, Webb PM, Schluter PJ, Shaw GR (2006) Recreational and 
occupational field exposure to freshwater cyanobacteria-a review 
of anecdotal and case reports, epidemiological studies and the 
challenges for epidemiologic assessment. Environ Health 5:1–13
Strichartz G, Rando T, Hall S, Gitschier J, Hall L, Magnani B, Bay CH 
(1986) On the mechanism by which saxitoxin binds to and blocks 
sodium channels. Ann N Y Acad Sci 479:96–112
Stirk WA, Ördög V , Van Staden J, Jäger K (2002) Cytokinin-and 
auxin-like activity in Cyanophyta and microalgae. J Appl Phycol 
14:215–221
Stirk WA, van Staden J, Novák O, Doležal K, Strnad M, Dobrev PI, 
Sipos G, Ördög V , Bálint P (2011) Changes in endogenous cyto-
kinin concentrations in Chlorella (Chlorophyceae) in relation to 
light and the cell cycle. J Phycol 47:291–301
Stirk WA, Bálint P, Tarkowská D, Novák O, Strnad M, Ördög V , Van 
Staden J (2013) Hormone profiles in microalgae: gibberellins and 
brassinosteroids. Plant Physiol Biochem 70:348–353
282 Page 34 of 35
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Stirk WA, Bálint P, Tarkowská D, Novak O, Maróti G, Ljung K, 
Turečková V , Strnad M, Ordög V , Van Staden J (2014) Effect of 
light on growth and endogenous hormones in Chlorella minutis-
sima (Trebouxiophyceae). Plant Physiol Biochem 79:66–76
Sun T, Rao S, Zhou X, Li L (2022) Plant carotenoids: recent advances 
and future perspectives. Mol Hort 2:3
Tabassum H, Ahmad IZ (2022) Nanoformulations loaded with micro-
algal bioactive compounds for disease therapy. Bioprospecting 
algae for nanosized materials. Springer International Publishing, 
Cham, pp 229–260
Takahama K, Matsuoka M, Nagahama K, Ogawa T (2003) Construc -
tion and analysis of a recombinant cyanobacterium expressing a 
chromosomally inserted gene for an ethylene-forming enzyme at 
the psbAI locus. J Biosci Bioeng 95:302–305
Takano S, Nakanishi A, Uemura D, Hirata Y (1979) Isolation and struc-
ture of a 334 nm UV-absorbing substance, porphyra-334 from the 
red alga Porphyra tenera Kjellman. Chem Lett 8:419–420
Tan LT (2007) Bioactive natural products from marine cyanobacteria 
for drug discovery. Phytochem 68:954–979
Tan LT, Phyo MY (2020) Marine cyanobacteria: a source of lead com-
pounds and their clinically-relevant molecular targets. Molecules 
25:2197
Tan LT, Okino T, Gerwick WH (2013) Bouillonamide: a mixed 
polyketide-peptide cytotoxin from the marine cyanobacterium 
Moorea bouillonii. Mar Drugs 11:3015–3024
Taori K, Paul VJ, Luesch H (2008) Structure and activity of largazole, 
a potent antiproliferative agent from the Floridian marine cyano -
bacterium Symploca sp. J Am Chem Soc 130:1806–1807
Tarakhovskaya ER, Maslov YI, Shishova MF (2007) Phytohormones 
in algae. Russ J Plant Physiol 54:163–170
Taylor MS, Stahl-Timmins W, Redshaw CH, Osborne NJ (2014) Toxic 
alkaloids in Lyngbya majuscula and related tropical marine cya -
nobacteria. Harmful Algae 31:1–8
Terlouw BR, Blin K, Navarro-Munoz JC, Avalon NE, Chevrette MG, 
Egbert S, Lee S, Meijer D, Recchia MJ, Reitz ZL, Van Santen JA 
(2023) MIBiG 3.0: a community-driven effort to annotate experi-
mentally validated biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res 
51:D603-10
Teshima SI, Kanazawa A (1972) Occurrence of sterols in the blue-green 
alga, Anabaena cylindrica. Bull Jap Soc Sci Fish 38:1197–1202
Thundimadathil J (2012) Cancer treatment using peptides: current 
therapies and future prospects. J Amino Acids 2012:967347
Tian BJ, Wang Y , Zhu YR, Lü XY , Huang K, Shao N, Beck CF (2006) 
Synthesis of the photorespiratory key enzyme serine:glyoxylate 
aminotransferase in C. reinhardtii is modulated by the light 
regime and cytokinin. Physiol Plant 127:571–582
Tiwari AK, Tiwari BS (2020) Cyanotherapeutics: an emerging field for 
future drug discovery. Appl Phycol 1:44–57
Todres ZV (2011) Chalcogenadiazoles: chemistry and applications. 
CRC Press
Tominaga N, Takahata M, Tominaga H (1993) Effects of NaCl and 
KNO3 concentrations on the abscisic acid content of Dunaliella 
sp. (Chlorophyta). In: Saline Lakes V: Proceedings of the Vth 
International Symposium on Inland Saline Lakes. Springer, Dor-
drecht, pp 163–168
Tonon G, Rizzolio F, Visentin F, Scattolin T (2024) Antibody drug con-
jugates for cancer therapy: from metallodrugs to nature-inspired 
payloads. Int J Mol Sci 25:8651
Törökné A, Asztalos M, Bánkiné M, Bickel H, Borbély G, Carmeli S, 
Weiszfeiler V (2004) Interlaboratory comparison trial on cylin -
drospermopsin measurement. Anal Biochem 332:280–284
Tsavkelova EA, Klimova SY , Cherdyntseva TA, Netrusov AI (2006) 
Hormones and hormone-like substances of microorganisms: a 
review. Appl Biochem Microbiol 42:229–235
US EPA (2019) S40|ALGALTOX| Algal toxins list from CompTox. 
Zenodo
Vairappan CS, Suzuki M, Abe T, Masuda M (2001) Halogenated 
metabolites with antibacterial activity from the Okinawan Lau-
rencia species. Phytochem 58:517–523
Valério E, Pereira P, Saker ML, Franca S, Tenreiro R (2005) Molecular 
characterization of Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii strains iso -
lated from Portuguese freshwaters. Harmful Algae 4:1044–1052
Varshney A, Singh V (2013) Effects of algal compounds on cancer cell 
line. J Exp Biol 1:337–352
Velichko N, Smirnova S, Averina S, Pinevich A (2021) A survey of 
Antarctic cyanobacteria. Hydrobiologia 848:2627–2652
Vincent M, Blanc-Garin V , Chenebault C, Cirimele M, Farci S, Garcia-
Alles LF, Cassier-Chauvat C, Chauvat F (2023) Impact of carbon 
fixation, distribution and storage on terpene production in eury -
haline cyanobacteria
V ogt T (2010) Phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Mol Plant 3:2–20
V olkman J (2003) Sterols in microorganisms. Appl Microbiol Biotech-
nol 60:495–506
V oráčová K, Hájek J, Mareš J, Urajová P, Kuzma M, Cheel J, Hrouzek 
P (2017) The cyanobacterial metabolite nocuolin A is a natural 
oxadiazine that triggers apoptosis in human cancer cells. PLoS 
ONE 12:e0172850
V oß U, Bishopp A, Farcot E, Bennett MJ (2014) Modelling hormonal 
response and development. Trends Plant Sci 19:311–319
Wada N, Sakamoto T, Matsugo S (2013) Multiple roles of photosyn -
thetic and sunscreen pigments in cyanobacteria focusing on the 
oxidative stress. Metabolites 3:463–483
Wang C, Hong T, Cui P, Wang J, Xia J (2021) Antimicrobial peptides 
towards clinical application: delivery and formulation. Adv Drug 
Deliv Rev 175:113818
Watanabe T, Kondo N (1976) Ethylene evolution in marine algae and 
a proteinaceous inhibitor of ethylene biosynthesis from red alga. 
Plant Cell Physiol 17:1159–1166
Weber T, Blin K, Duddela S, Krug D, Kim HU, Bruccoleri R, Lee SY , 
Fischbach MA, Müller R, Wohlleben W, Breitling R (2015) anti-
SMASH 3.0—a comprehensive resource for the genome mining 
of biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res 43:W237–W243
Weiz AR, Ishida K, Makower K, Ziemert N, Hertweck C, Dittmann 
E (2011) Leader peptide and a membrane protein scaffold guide 
the biosynthesis of the tricyclic peptide microviridin. Chem Biol 
18:1413–1421
Welker M, V on Döhren H (2006) Cyanobacterial peptides—nature’s 
own combinatorial biosynthesis. FEMS Microbiol Rev 
30:530–563
Whitehead K, Hedges JI (2005) Photodegradation and photosensitiza-
tion of mycosporine-like amino acids. J Photochem Photobiol B 
Biol 80:115–121
Whitton BA, Potts M (2007) The ecology of cyanobacteria: their 
diversity in time and space. Springer Sci Bus Media
Wiegand C, Pflugmacher S (2005) Ecotoxicological effects of selected 
cyanobacterial secondary metabolites: a short review. Toxicol 
Appl Pharmacol 203:201–218
Wilhelm SW, Trick CG (1994) Iron-limited growth of cyanobacteria: 
multiple siderophore production is a common response. Limnol 
Oceanogr 39:1979–1984
Wu X, Liu Z, Liu Y , Yang Y , Shi F, Cheong KL, Teng B (2020) Immu-
nostimulatory effects of polysaccharides from Spirulina platensis 
in vivo and vitro and their activation mechanism on RAW246. 7 
macrophages. Mar Drugs 18:538
Xia J, Wishart DS (2016) Using MetaboAnalyst 3.0 for comprehen -
sive metabolomics data analysis. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 
55:14–20
Xia J, Bjorndahl TC, Tang P, Wishart DS (2008) MetaboMiner–semi-
automated identification of metabolites from 2D NMR spectra of 
complex biofluids. BMC Bioinfo 9:507
Page 35 of 35 282
3 Biotech (2026) 16:282
Yang SB, Banik N, Han B, Lee DN, Park J (2022) Peptide-based bio -
conjugates and therapeutics for targeted anticancer therapy. Phar-
maceutics 14:1378
Yasin D, Ahmad N, Rizvi MA, Fatma T (2021) Cyanobacteria as a 
promising source of therapeutic agents against various human dis-
eases. Phycobiotechnology. Apple Academic Press, pp 187–213
Yokoya NS, Stirk WA, Van Staden J, Novák O, Turečková V , Pěnčík 
A, Strnad M (2010) Endogenous cytokinins, auxins, and abscisic 
acid in red algae from Brazil. J Phycol 46:1198–1205
Yordanova ZP, Iakimova ET, Cristescu SM, Harren FJM, Kapchina-
Toteva VM, Woltering EJ (2010) Involvement of ethylene and 
nitric oxide in cell death in mastoparan-treated unicellular alga 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Cell Biol Int 34:301–308
Yoshida K, Igarashi E, Mukai M, Hirata K, Miyamoto K (2003) Induc-
tion of tolerance to oxidative stress in the green alga Chlamydo-
monas reinhardtii by abscisic acid. Plant Cell Environ 26:451–457
Yuan H, Zhang J, Nageswaran D, Li L (2015) Carotenoid metabolism 
and regulation in horticultural crops. Horticul Res 23:2
Zahradníčkova H, Polinska M (1991) High-performance thin-layer 
chromatographic and high-performance liquid chromatographic 
determination of abscisic acid produced by cyanobacteria. J 
Chromatogr A 555:239–245
Zainuddin EN, Mentel R, Wray V , Jansen R, Nimtz M, Lalk M, Mundt 
S (2007) Cyclic depsipeptides, ichthyopeptins A and B, from 
Microcystis ichthyoblabe. J Nat Prod 70:1084–1088
Zhang S, Sun J, Feng D, Sun H, Cui J, Zeng X, Lu X (2023) Unlock -
ing the potentials of cyanobacterial photosynthesis for directly 
converting carbon dioxide into glucose. Nat Commun 14:3425
Zhang J, Yang Y , Si J, Chen D, Dong C, Han Z (2025a) Artificial intel-
ligence in the discovery and modification of biological elements 
in medicinal plants. Medicinal Plant Biology. h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 4 
8 1 3 0 / m p b - 0 0 2 5 - 0 0 1 0 
Zhang J, Xu Z, Zhong C, Liu H, Zhu Q, Sun Z, Guo Q, Cui SW (2026) 
Artificial intelligence reshaping non-starch polysaccharides 
research: a comprehensive review of intelligent integration from 
extraction optimization to functional design. Compr Rev Food 
Sci Food Saf 25:e70379
Zhang X, Rahnavard A, Crandall KA (2025) Machine learning 
enhances biomarker discovery: From multi-omics to functional 
genomics. Med Res Arch 13
Zulfiqar S, Sharif S, Saeed M, Tahir A (2021) Role of carotenoids in 
photosynthesis. In: Carotenoids: Structure and function in the 
human body. pp. 147–187
Żymańczyk-Duda E, Samson SO, Brzezińska-Rodak M, Klimek-
Ochab M (2022) Versatile applications of cyanobacteria in bio -
technology. Microorganisms 10:2318
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of 
such publishing agreement and applicable law.