Illegal mines threaten biodiversity and drinking water in Ghana’s Atewa Forest 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Features 
 -->
 Videos Podcasts Specials Articles 
 Shorts 
 Donate 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 English 
 Español (Spanish) 
 Français (French) 
 Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) 
 Brasil (Portuguese) 
 India (English) 
 हिंदी (Hindi) 
 বাংলা (Bengali) 
 Swahili 
 
 

 
 
 Videos Podcasts Articles 
 Short News Feature Stories 
 The Latest 
 Explore All 
 

 
 
 About 
 Team 
 Contact 
 
 
 Donate 
 Subscribe page 
 Submissions 
 
 
 Privacy Policy 
 Terms of Use 
 Advertising 
 
 
 Wild Madagascar 
 For Kids 
 Mongabay.org 
 Reforestation App 
 
 
 Planetary Health Check 
 Conservation Effectiveness 
 Mongabay Data Studio 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Illegal mines threaten biodiversity and drinking water in Ghana’s Atewa Forest 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mabel Adorkor Annang 
 
 21 Sep 2026 
 Africa 
 
 
 
 Comments 
 Share article 
 
 
 
 
 Share this article 
 If you liked this story, share it with other people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 
 Linkedin 
 
 
 Threads 
 
 
 Whatsapp 
 
 
 Reddit 
 
 
 
 Email 
 
 Page link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Forestry officials charged with protecting the Atewa Forest Reserve in eastern Ghana have been overrun by illegal miners whose operations are putting the water supply of millions of Ghanaians in jeopardy, according to conservation groups. Atewa is a biodiversity hotspot, with more than 80 threatened and endangered species found in its 26,300 hectares (65,000 acres). Environment group A Rocha Ghana and others have called on the government to provide greater resources to counter illegal mining in Atewa and elsewhere. See All Key Ideas 

 Every day, scores of illegal miners on motorbikes swarm into the Atewa Forest Reserve, in eastern Ghana — ignoring the handful of Forestry Commission guards charged with keeping them out. 
 Inside the reserve, the miners have stripped forest cover and excavated pits, their passage marked by abandoned equipment and temporary camps and muddy and polluted streams. Their actions jeopardize the drinking water of as many as five million Ghanaians. 
 “We say this based on a lot of records coming from the Forestry Commission staff, some court records as well,” says Daryl Bosu, deputy national director of operations at conservation initiative A Rocha Ghana, which has been monitoring Atewa and other forested areas for a decade. A Rocha played a key role in a civil society coalition opposing government plans to mine for bauxite in the reserve . 
 Bosu says A Rocha has observed that many of the rivers and streams in the area, which previously ran clear, have turned brown with sediment since the miners overran the reserve. Miners, he says, have cut down trees along water courses, which he fears have been contaminated with mercury, cyanide and arsenic  — all widely used in illegal mining operations. 
 “The Forestry Commission team is complaining of the unprecedented attack on the Atewa forest because of mining and how they are seriously overwhelmed as a result of pressure which they have never experienced,” he tells Mongabay. 
 Aerial view of a mine site in Atewa. Image courtesy of A Rocha Ghana. 
 The critically endangered Atewa slippery frog ( Conraua sagyimase ) is known only from the forest reserve. Image © John Sullivan via iNaturalist ( CC BY 4.0 ). 
 Atewa is home to 239 bird species, and an astonishing 711 butterfly species, according to A Rocha . “The forest is noted for having several endangered species such as the dotted border, which is a butterfly [ Mylothris atewa ],” Bosu says. “The [endangered] white-naped mangabey [ Cercocebus lunulatus ], which has not been seen in the area in recent times, but used to be there, and Shelley&#8217;s eagle owl [ Bubo shelleyi ] as well.” 
 A 2022 assessment by BirdLife International and the Ghana Wildlife Society, confirmed the reserve is a biodiversity hotspot — with around 20% of threatened species in Ghana found there. It is the only known home for the critically endangered Afia Birago’s puddle frog ( Phrynobatrachus afiabirago ) and the Atewa slippery frog ( Conraua sagyimase ). 
 In contrast to many other illegal mine sites that have sprung up in other parts of Ghana, Bosu tells Mongabay that the miners presently tearing into the forest here are working with only basic equipment: pickaxes and shovels and “one-leg” machines — portable versions of the diesel-powered pumps known in Ghana as “changfan”. 
 They are nonetheless doing major damage, he says, often operating at night when short-staffed forestry personnel are absent. Bosu tells Mongabay that the district manager responsible for the Atewa area told his superiors that the illegal miners have recently become very aggressive, citing a case in which two of his forest guards were taken hostage and had to be rescued by police. 
 The miners encroaching on the reserve include not only Ghanaians, but gold miners from neighboring countries, Bosu says. 
 “We’ve seen an influx of both foreigners and local people moving in droves into the forest reserves, just with pick axe and ‘one leg’ and digging along various trees that can be found in the forest reserve,” he says. “And as a result many entry points of the forest reserves have been encroached upon, with the miners going in and out by day and night and this has really exposed the forest to significant risk than ever before” 
 Foothills of the Atewa Forest Reserve in 2019. Image by Ahtziri Gonzalez/CIFOR via Flickr ( CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ). 
 In a press release on Sept. 14 , A Rocha Ghana and other concerned groups urged the government to provide the Forestry Commission and law enforcement agencies with more resources to counter illegal mining in Atewa and elsewhere. They also repeated demands that the reserve be listed as a national park, strengthening its protection. 
 Citing several recent cases, Bosu says he is also concerned that if arrested, the illegal miners are quickly granted bail and return to the forest to continue mining while their cases remain pending — in at least one case, for five years. 
 The Forestry Commission and the National Anti-Illegal Mining Operations Secretariat, (NAIMOS) declined to respond to questions from Mongabay. But, in a Sept. 15 media statement reported by local media , NAIMOS spokesperson Paa Kwesi Schandorf, acknowledged that A Rocha and others’ concerns are valid and would receive urgent attention. 
 “Having already conducted reconnaissance operations within the enclave, NAIMOS is currently collaborating with relevant security and state agencies, to take decisive action within the reserve,” the statement said. “This next line of intervention will be guided by verified intelligence and further operational assessment to achieve maximum results.” 
 Banner image: Illegal miners at work in the Atewa Forest Reserve, Ghana. Image courtesy of A Rocha Ghana. 
 Ghana&#8217;s government faces pushback in bid to mine biodiversity haven for bauxite 
 
 Ghana repeals legislation that opened forest reserves to mining 
 
 Feedback : Use this form to send a message to the author of this post. If you want to post a public comment, you can do that at the bottom of the page. 
 
 Cite this article Mabel Adorkor Annang (2026). Illegal mines threaten biodiversity and drinking water in Ghana’s Atewa Forest. Mongabay Conservation news. DOI: https://doi.org/10.66709/news-330304 
 
 Credits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terna Gyuse Editor 
 
 
 
 

 
 Topics Biodiversity Biodiversity Hotspots Conflict Conservation Crime Deforestation Ecosystems Endangered Species Environment Environmental Law Forest Destruction Forests Gold Mining Governance Illegal Mining Law Mining Natural Resources Pollution Protected Areas Rainforests Tropical Forests Water Pollution Africa Ghana West Africa See Topics 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Guinea’s Iron Frontier 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In the Nimba Mountains, a film examines the paradox of mining-funded conservation 
 
 Ashoka Mukpo 
 8 May 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hopes and fears as Guinea exports iron ore from Simandou mines 
 
 Ashoka Mukpo 
 16 Jan 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rare bats at risk as iron ore mine advances in Guinea’s Nimba Mountains 
 
 Victoria Schneider 
 30 Dec 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Setback for Guinea mine that threatens World Heritage chimp reserve 
 
 Ashoka Mukpo 
 15 May 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What does it take to turn one of the world’s richest iron deposits into a global export hub? Eastern Guinea has become a focal point in the global race for high-grade iron ore. Mongabay has traced the rapid expansion of two of Guinea’s largest iron ore projects in the Simandou range and the Nimba Mountains, [&hellip;] 
 
 
 Guinea’s Iron Frontier series 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Free and open access to credible information 
 
 
 Learn more 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Latest articles 
 All articles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Indonesia threatens prison time for unauthorized downloads of forest data 
 
 
 Dyna Rochmyaningsih, Philip Jacobson 
 6 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uncertainty mounts as Suriname struggles to evict illegal settlers in the Amazon 
 
 
 Maxwell Radwin 
 5 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ‘There could be local extinction’: The fight to protect Indonesia’s orangutans as El Niño fuels fires 
 
 
 Hans Nicholas Jong 
 5 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Feature story 
 
 Vietnam’s fishers face rising costs, declining catches and a contested sea 
 
 
 Minh L Tran 
 2 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Probiotics prevented coral bleaching during a Red Sea heat wave: Study 
 
 
 Allessandra DiCorato 
 2 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Permafrost, wetland, wildfire and freshwater emissions could amplify climate change by up to 30%, study finds 
 
 
 Liz Kimbrough 
 2 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to grow $25K into community-led conservation: Interview with Tanzania’s Mwambao 
 
 
 David Akana 
 2 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 As Hong Kong heats up, calls grow for tougher rules to protect outdoor workers 
 
 
 June Wong 
 2 Oct 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 All articles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subscribe 
 
 
 Stay informed with news and inspiration from nature’s frontline. 
 
 Newsletter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News formats 
 
 
 
 Videos 
 Podcasts Articles 
 Specials 
 Shorts Features 
 The Latest 
 
 
 
 
 About 
 
 
 
 About 
 Contact 
 Donate Impacts 
 Newsletters 
 Submissions 
 Terms of Use 
 
 
 
 
 External links 
 
 
 
 Wild Madagascar 
 For Kids 
 Mongabay.org 
 Reforestation App 
 Planetary Health Check 
 Conservation Effectiveness 
 Mongabay Data Studio 
 
 
 
 
 Social media 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn Instagram Youtube X Facebook Tiktok Reddit BlueSky Mastodon Android App Apple News RSS / XML 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 © 2026 Copyright Conservation news. Mongabay is a U.S.-based non-profit conservation and environmental science news platform. Our EIN or tax ID is 45-3714703.
 
 
 
 
 
 you&#039;re currently offline