Hydrogeochemical and isotopic characterization of shallow groundwater in Dangbe East and West Districts, Ghana | Discover Applied Sciences | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Applied Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeochemical and isotopic characterization of shallow groundwater in Dangbe East and West Districts, Ghana 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 25 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover Applied Sciences 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeochemical and isotopic characterization of shallow groundwater in Dangbe East and West Districts, Ghana
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 F. A. Mensah 1 , S. K. Bartaya 2 , B. Ofosu 1 , P. A. Akaba 3 , S. Obiri 1 & … T. A. Tagbor 4   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Groundwater is a critical water resource in coastal regions of Ghana, where surface water availability is often limited and vulnerable to contamination. Understanding recharge mechanisms and hydrogeochemical evolution in shallow aquifers is essential for sustainable water resource management, particularly under increasing climatic variability and anthropogenic pressure. This study integrates hydrochemical and isotopic techniques to characterize shallow groundwater in the Dangbe East and West Districts of southeastern Ghana. A total of 48 water samples from wells, rivers, streams, and lagoons were analyzed for major ions, trace elements, and stable isotopes (δ¹⁸O, δD, and δ¹³C-DIC). Hydrogeochemical tools, including Piper and Gibbs diagrams, were used to identify dominant water types and controlling processes, while isotopic data were evaluated against the Global Meteoric Water Line (GMWL) to determine recharge sources. Groundwater is predominantly of the Na–Cl type, with cations in the order Na > Mg > Ca > K and anions Cl > SO₄ > NO₃ > HCO₃. Elevated salinity and high Cl⁻ concentrations indicate significant influence of seawater intrusion and evaporation, particularly in coastal and lagoon environments. Trace element enrichment (e.g., Sr, Fe, Mn, As) reflects strong water–rock interaction. Isotopic compositions show that most samples plot along or near the GMWL, indicating meteoric origin, while a smaller fraction exhibits evaporative enrichment and mixing with surface waters. The results demonstrate that rainfall is the dominant source of recharge to the shallow aquifer system, with groundwater chemistry primarily controlled by water–rock interaction and modified by coastal salinization and localized anthropogenic inputs. This integrated approach provides a robust basis for groundwater management in vulnerable coastal environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assessment of hydrochemical processes, isotopic characterization (δ 18 O, δ 2 H and 3 H) and relevant usability characteristics of the groundwaters in Manavgat basin (Antalya, Turkey)
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 26 November 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 An integration of hydrochemical data and stable isotopes in groundwater evaluation in Ngboejogu, Southern Benue Trough, Nigeria
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 07 October 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeochemical and isotopic investigations on the origins of groundwater salinization in Çarşamba coastal aquifer (North Turkey)
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 14 February 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Geodynamics 
 
 
 
 Geotechnical Engineering and Applied Earth Sciences 
 
 
 
 Hydrogeology 
 
 
 
 Earth Sciences 
 
 
 
 Geology 
 
 
 
 Geochemistry 
 
 
 
 Groundwater Quality Assessment and Management Strategies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements This work was funded by the Non-Aligned Movement for Science and Technology (NAM S&T) Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, through the Developing Country Scientist Fellowship to the first author. The authors thank the director of the Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun, for assisting us with all the facilities used to conduct this study. The contributions of Dr. P.P. Khanna for the measurements of trace elements and Dr. Santosh Rai for stable isotopes are gratefully acknowledged. Funding This work was funded by the Non-Aligned Movement for Science and Technology (NAM S&T) Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, through the Developing Country Scientist Fellowship to the first author. Author information Authors and Affiliations CSIR-Building and Road Research Institute, Geotechnical and Materials Engineering Division, Kumasi, Ghana F. A. Mensah, B. Ofosu & S. Obiri Waddia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun, India S. K. Bartaya Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Department of Geological Engineering, Faculty of Civil and Geo-Engineering, Kumasi, Ghana P. A. Akaba CSIR-Institute of Industrial Research, Accra, Ghana T. A. Tagbor Authors F. A. Mensah View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar S. K. Bartaya View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar B. Ofosu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar P. A. Akaba View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar S. Obiri View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar T. A. Tagbor View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 F. A. Mensah . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Mensah, F.A., Bartaya, S.K., Ofosu, B. et al. Hydrogeochemical and isotopic characterization of shallow groundwater in Dangbe East and West Districts, Ghana.
 Discov Appl Sci (2026). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-026-09356-9 Download citation Received : 18 February 2026 Accepted : 04 August 2026 Published : 25 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-026-09356-9 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Shallow groundwater Stable isotopes Geochemical tracers Hydrogeology Water management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature