Daniel S. Katz is the new Editor-in-Chief of
JOSSArfon Smith , Daniel S. Katz
Blog post published September 18, 2026 in Journal of Open Source Software Blog |
https://doi.org/10.59349/pzaq7-0aq48
Abstract
[From Arfon] Earlier this year I announced that I was stepping down as Editor-in-Chief of JOSS
after ten years in the role, and we put out a call for a new EiC. Today I’m delighted to announce
that Daniel S. Katz is taking over as Editor-in-Chief, effective 18 September 2026. Dan was one of
the people who helped shape JOSS before it even existed.
Keywords
Information Systems (Subfield), Announcements
Recommended citation
Smith, A., & Katz, D. S. (2026, September 18). Daniel S. Katz is the new Editor-in-Chief of JOSS. 
Journal of Open Source Software Blog |. https://doi.org/10.59349/pzaq7-0aq48
Copyright
Copyright © Arfon Smith et al. 2026. Distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
[From Arfon]
Earlier this year I announced that I was stepping down as Editor-in-Chief of JOSS after ten years in
the role, and we put out a call for a new EiC. Today I’m delighted to announce that Daniel S. Katz is
taking over as Editor-in-Chief, effective 18 September 2026.
Dan was one of the people who helped shape JOSS before it even existed. He was part of the
small group who helped refine what JOSS should be (and shouldn’t be) in the months before we
launched in May 2016. He went on to become one of our most active Associate Editors-in-Chief,
and has been deeply involved in every significant editorial decision the journal has made over the
past decade. I can’t think of anyone better placed to lead JOSS into its next chapter.
Dan and I will be working together over the coming weeks to transition EiC responsibilities.
[From Dan]
When Arfon first told me he was thinking of stepping down, back in 2019 while we were at
Murrayfield Rugby Stadium (for a conference of course), I wondered if and how JOSS would
survive. Fortunately, in the seven years since then, JOSS continued to thrive and grow, overcoming
obstacles like the initial Covid period and then the increased impact of generative AI.
By the time Arfon started talking about stepping down again last year, I had become confident
that the JOSS community of associate-editors-in-chief (AEiCs) and editors would be able to keep
the journal going. So when I applied to be EiC, I had a mix of feelings that included satisfaction
about what we have done so far, confidence about the future and that our community could
handle it, and some remaining fear about what I didn’t know and wouldn’t find out until I started.
Now, on the cusp of this transition, I’m really looking forward to working with the full JOSS
community, including AEiCs and editors who have ideas about how we can improve the journal
and its processes, other community members who continue to submit software and papers and to
review them, and of course, Arfon, who we will continue to rely on as both the past/founding EiC
and the continuing JOSS tech lead.
JOSS, as a developer-friendly diamond open access journal for research software packages that
itself runs like an open source project and is a member of the open source community, isn’t
changing, and we’ll continue to work collectively to improve research software and its recognition,
and to provide scholarly credit for its developers and maintainers. Please join us by submitting or 
volunteering to review, and keep an eye out for other opportunities to contribute.
Journal of Open Source Software Blog | • Daniel S. Katz is the new Editor-in-Chief of JOSS
https://doi.org/10.59349/pzaq7-0aq48 Page 2