npj | science of food Review
Published in partnership with Beijing Technology and Business U niversity & International Union of Food Science and Technology
Article in Press https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0
Muscle ﬁber types in mutton: implications
for meat quality and ﬂavor formation—
a review
Check for updates
Mengjie Chen1,4, Xiaofei Zhang2,4,N i a nZ h a n g1,3, Aishao Shangguan1, Fan Jiang1, Xiaojun Suo1,J i nC h a i2 &
Qi Xiong1
Mutton quality and ﬂavor are closely associated with muscle ﬁber type composition. This review
summarizes muscle ﬁber classiﬁcation, mutton ﬂavor formation pathways, and the effects of muscle
ﬁber types on color, pH, tenderness, juiciness, andﬂavor compounds. It also discusses how genotype,
age, sex, feeding practices, and nutrition regulate mutton quality through muscle ﬁber transformation,
providing references for high-quality mutton production.
M u t t o ni st e n d e ra n dj u i c y ,d e l i c i o u sa n du n i q u ei nﬂavor. It has the
advantages of high protein, low fat and cholesterol, rich in amino acids,
vitamins and trace elements necessary for the human body, which occupies
an important position in people ‘s diet structure and deeply loved by
consumers1. According to the data of the Nat ional Bureau of Statistics
(NBS), in 2024, the total output of pork, beef, mutton and poultry in China
w a sa sh i g ha s9 6 . 6 3m i l l i o nt o n s ,o fwhich the annual output of pork was
57.06 million tons, the annual output ofpoultry was 26.6 million tons, the
annual output of beef was 7.79 million tons, and the annual output of
mutton was only 5.18 million tons, accounting for only 5.36% of the total
output of pork, beef, mutton and poultryi nC h i n a ,w h i c hw a sf a rl o w e rt h a n
that of pork, poultry and beef2. There are many reasons for the low yield of
mutton, among which the meat quality and specialﬂavor of mutton directly
affect the acceptance and market value of consumers. Research has found
that meat tenderness, taste, and fat content are considered by the majority of
consumers to be highly decisive factors. Elderly people consider tenderness
more important thanﬂavor, preferring cuts with softer, more tender meat,
while younger individuals prefer cuts with richerﬂavors3. Consumers dis-
satisfaction with theﬂavor and odor of mutton is the primary constraint on
the overall consumption quality, with strong odors and unpleasant tastes
pose signiﬁcant barriers to consuming mutton4. Foreign scholars describe
this undesirable ﬂavor characteristics of mutton as “animal odor,”“ rotten
odor,”“ metallic odor,”“ fecal odor,” or “camphor odor,” whereas in China,
the term “gamey odor” is commonly used to characterize the distinctive
ﬂavor of mutton5. In recent years, in pace with the continuous improvement
of people ‘s requirements for food quality, the research on the ﬂavor of
mutton has been paid more and more attention. Improving mutton quality,
enhancingﬂavor, and reducing mutton odor has become a core issue, which
require urgent solutions for enhancing efﬁciency and ensuring sustainable
development in the mutton industry. Meat quality andﬂavor are the core
indicators of sheep breeding, mainly manifested in color, pH value, ten-
derness, intramuscular fat (IMF), juiciness, andﬂavor. Their formation is a
complex process, the result of the interaction of genetic, physiological,
metabolic, and environmental factors. As the basic functional units of
muscle tissue, muscle ﬁbers are a crucial link connecting “physiological
metabolism” with“meat quality andﬂavor.” Studies have shown that factors
such as muscle ﬁber type, diameter, density and metabolic characteristics
can affect the mutton tenderness, juiciness, andﬂavor compound content,
ultimately shaping its overall sensory characteristics6. Therefore, elucidating
the pathways of mutton ﬂavor formation, analyzing the relationship
between muscleﬁber types and mutton quality andﬂavor, and delineating
the factors that affect muscleﬁber types, meat quality andﬂavor are of great
signiﬁcance for improving mutton quality, reducing odors, meeting con-
sumer demands, and promoting the sustainable development of the sheep
farming industry.
Muscle ﬁber characteristics and their distribution
in mutton
Muscle ﬁb e ri st h em o s tf u n d a m e n t a ls t r u ctural unit of muscle, accounting
for about 75– 90% of muscle volume. It is elongated, multinucleated and
spindle-shaped, composed of numerous densely packed myoﬁbrils, which
plays a crucial role in regulating the metabolism and endocrine functions in
livestock and poultry7. Livestock muscles contain various muscleﬁber types,
and the differences in their contractile properties and metabolic patterns are
key determinants of meat tenderness, juiciness, andﬂavor. The traditional
classiﬁcation method categorizes muscleﬁbers into three types: red muscle
ﬁbers, white muscleﬁbers, and intermediate muscleﬁbers between the two.
Alternatively, they can also be broadly classiﬁed into fast-twitch and slow-
1Institute of Animal Sciences and Veterinary Medicine, Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering and Molecular Breeding of Hubei Province, Hubei Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Wuhan, China.2Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, China. 3Wuhan Luxiang Agricultural Development Co. Ltd, Wuhan, China. 4These authors contributed equally: Mengjie Chen, Xiaofei Zhang.
e-mail: phenixxq@163.com
npj Science of Food Article in Press
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
twitch ﬁbers. In 1970, Brooke et al. divided muscleﬁbers into three types :
type I, type IIA and type IIB muscleﬁbers according to the different myosin
ATPase activity8. Jouffroy et al. used NADH-TR staining method to divide
muscle ﬁbers into four types : type I, type IIA, type IIB and type IIX9.W i t h
the advancement of molecular b iology techniques, the classi ﬁcation of
muscleﬁbers has increasingly centered on the myosin heavy chain (MyHC)
i s o f o r m sa sac o r eb i o m a r k e r .T h e s ei n c l u d eM y H C7 ,M y H C4 ,M y H C2 ,
and MyHC 1, which correspond to type I, type IIA, type IIB, and type IIX
muscle ﬁbers, respectively10. These four types represent slow-contracting
oxidized muscle ﬁbers, fast-contracting oxidized glycolytic muscle ﬁbers,
fast-contracting glycolytic muscle ﬁbers, and intermediate muscle ﬁbers,
respectively. In mutton, the composition and distribution of theseﬁber types
show signiﬁcant site-speciﬁcity and breed variation, which is an intrinsic
reason for differences in texture andﬂavor between different cuts. Currently,
the most studied muscles regarding mutton ﬁber characteristics are the
longissimus dorsi (loin) and biceps f emoris (round). Study reported the
muscle ﬁber type composition of the longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris
muscle in Sunite sheep, revealing thatthe proportions of type I, IIA, and IIB
ﬁbers in the longissimus dorsi were 8.74%, 23.36%, and 67.90%, respectively,
while those in the biceps femoris muscle were 16.34%, 29.96%, and 53.69%,
respectively. The proportion of muscle ﬁb e rt y p e si nt h et w op a r t si sa s
follows: type IIB> type IIA> type I, with type IIBﬁbers being the main type11.
In black Tibetan sheep, the proportions of type I muscle ﬁbers in the
longissimus dorsi, triceps brachii, and biceps femoris were 12.55%, 12.34%,
and 11.92%, respectively. The proportion of type IIA muscle ﬁbers is
32.26%, 29.79%, and 25.71%, respectiv ely. The proportion of type IIB
muscleﬁbers is 55.19%, 57.97%, and 62.37%, respectively. The proportion of
oxidized muscleﬁbers in the longissimus dorsi was higher than that in the
triceps brachii and biceps femoris. Moreover, the proportion of different
types of muscleﬁbers in the three parts follows the order: type IIB> type IIA>
type I 12. The functional characteristics of each ﬁb e rt y p ea n dt h e i rd i s -
tribution in mutton are detailed in Table1 and Fig. 1.
Key pathways of mutton ﬂavor formation
Flavor is one of the most important quality characteristics of meat products
and a key factor in the overall accepta bility of meat products, including
fragrance, taste and odor. And also encompassing various taste sensations
(sour, sweet, bitter, umami, salty), olfactory perceptions, tactile experiences,
and fragrant aroma (fat aroma, barbec ue aroma, etc.), collectively con-
tributing to the meat ﬂavor richness13,14.T h e ﬂavor precursors in meat
produce a variety of ﬂavor substances through a series of ﬂavor reactions.
Among them, lipid oxidation, Maillard reaction, thiamine degradation,
rumen microbial metabolism and the interaction between these reaction
products play a key role in the formation ofﬂavor compounds, showing the
unique ﬂavor of mutton. The formation mechanism of these reactions
illustrated in Fig.2.
Lipid oxidation
Lipid oxidation is one of the key pathways for the formation of volatileﬂavor
compounds in mutton. Mutton has a relatively high content of unsaturated
fatty acids (UFAs), which are structurally unstable. Lipids in mutton are
prone to oxidation during aging, processing, and storage, producing volatile
carbonyl compounds with lowﬂavor thresholds, such as aldehydes, ketones,
esters, and alcohols, which play a decisive role in mutton aroma15. However,
branched-chain unsaturated fatty acids produced by hydrolysis, such as
4-methyloctanoic acid (MOA), 4-ethyloctanoic acid (EOA) and
4-methylnonanoic acid (MNA), play a decisive role in the odour of
mutton16. The study measured the odor activity values (OAV) of 4-alkyl
branched-chain fatty acids in sheep adipose tissue and found that MOA and
EOA exhibited OAV values ranging from 4.7 – 26.5 and 3.1– 28.3, respec-
tively, while MNA showed the lowest OAV value (0.0– 0.1)17.I na d d i t i o n ,
excessive lipid oxidationcan lead to warmed-overﬂavor (WOF), primarily
caused by the catalysis of phospholipid oxidation in muscle by released
heme and non-heme iron during cooking, ultimately generating undesirable
ﬂavor compounds18.
Maillard reaction
The Maillard reaction refers to a complex series of non-enzymatic browning
reactions between reducing sugars (e.g., glucose, ribose) and free amino
acids (e.g., amino acids, proteins, peptides) during heating. These reactions
involve dehydration, degradation, condensation, and polymerization, ulti-
mately producing compounds like pyrrole, pyrazine, furan, and thiazole,
which give mutton a uniqueﬂavor and color19. Glutamic acid, aspartic acid,
glycine, alanine and other umami amino acids can form umami compounds
through the Maillard reaction, e nhancing the saltiness of mutton 20.T h e
Maillard reaction can also interact with lipid thermal degradation reactions,
inﬂuencing the overallﬂavor.
Thiamin degradation
Thiamine, also known as vitamin B1, is a bicyclic compound containing
sulfur and nitrogen. As an important precursor of meat odor, it readily
undergoes thermal degradation under neutral or alkaline conditions, gen-
erating various nitrogen- or sulfur-containing volatileﬂavor compounds,
such as aliphatic sul ﬁdes, thiophenes, and thiacyclic compounds 21,22.
Research has shown that the content of thiamine in mutton ranging from
0.17 to 0.18 mg/100 g, and its degradation ef ﬁciency is easily affected by
factors such as pH, temperature, time, and matrix composition 23.O p t i -
mizing cooking conditions to enhan ce the degradation of thiamine can
improve the aroma and umami of mutton.
Rumen microbial metabolism
The rumen microbial of ruminant si sc o m p l e x .T h ev a s tn u m b e ro f
microorganisms present in the rumen signiﬁcantly affects feed digestion and
utilization, energy conversion, fat deposition, and the formation of ﬂavor
compounds in meat. For example, rumenyeasts and lactic acid bacteria can
break down carbohydrates and proteins in feed, producing volatile com-
pounds like alcohols, esters, and acids. These compounds interact with fat
oxidation or Maillard reaction products to form complexﬂavor systems. In
addition, under the action of rumen microbial, tryptophan and tyrosine in
the body undergo deamination and decarboxylation reactions, respectively,
producing 3-methylindole and 4-methylphenol. 3-Methylindole (skatole)
and 4-methylphenol (p-cresol) are al so the primary contributors to the
Table 1 | Functional characteristics of muscle ﬁber types
Muscle
ﬁber types
Main
marker
Diameter Contraction
speed
Mitochondrial
density
Metabolic
type
Myoglobin
content
Glycogen
content
Fatigue
resistance
Distribution in
mutton
Type Ⅰ MyHC Ⅰ Thinnest Slowest Highest Aerobic
oxidation
Highest Lowest Highest Biceps femoris
Type ⅡA MyHC ⅡA Moderate Moderate High Oxidatiove-
Glycolysis
High Moderate Moderate Longissimus
dorsi11
Type ⅡX MyHC ⅡX Thick Fast Moderate Anaerobic
glycolysis
Moderate High Low –
Type ⅡB MyHC ⅡB Thickest Fastest Lowest Anaerobic
glycolysis
Lowest Highest Lowest Longissimus
dorsi12
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
distinctive mutton odor24. 3-Methylindole is closely associated with the
characteristicﬂavor proﬁle of meat sheep raised under grazing conditions.
Studies have shown that when the concentration of 3-methylindole exceeds
the metabolic threshold in the liver, it enters systemic bloodstream and
accumulates in the mutton fat tissue, thereby inﬂuencing the mutton odor25.
The formation of 4-methylphenol primarily depends on the feed consumed
by ruminants and is also strongly correlated with grazing activities and the
pH value of the meat26. Its content is positively correlated with grazing time
and negatively correlated with the ﬁnal pH value in meat 27.A d d i t i o n a l l y ,
research reported that using active components from Allium plants and
their extracts can inhibit rumen microbial biohydrogenation, thereby sup-
pressing the synthesis of 4-alkyl-branched fatty acids and reducing mut-
ton odor1.
Regulatory mechanisms of muscleﬁber types on meat
quality and eating ﬂavor of mutton
The aforementioned four chemical pathways collectively determine the
formation of muttonﬂavor. These pathways are closely associated with the
metabolic characteristics of muscle ﬁbers, energy supply patterns, myo-
globin content, phospholipid distribution, and IMF deposition. As the
fundamental functional unit of muscl et i s s u e ,t h et y p ec o m p o s i t i o na n d
metabolic characteristics of muscleﬁbers directly or indirectly inﬂuence the
pathways of mutton ﬂavor formation, thereby determining the sensory
quality, nutritional value, andﬂavor proﬁle. Furthermore, the muscleﬁbers
characteristics serve as the intrinsic determinant of meat quality andﬂavor.
Meat quality is closely related to the appearance, palatability, and nutritional
value, primarily encompassing meat color, pH value, tenderness, IMF
content, juiciness, andﬂavor. The relative composition of muscleﬁber types
determines the overall metabolic processes of livestock and poultry muscles
post-slaughter, ultimately in ﬂuencing meat quality. The regulatory
mechanisms of muscle ﬁber types on various indicators are detailed in
Table 2.
Effects of muscle ﬁber types on meat color
Color is one of the intuitive basis forconsumers to judge whether the quality
of mutton is fresh, which determines theﬁnal evaluation and acceptance of
consumers. Normal mutton color is bright red or brick red, with myoglobin
being the main pigment in ﬂuencing fresh meat color 28. Differences in
myoglobin content within muscles directly inﬂuence the catalytic activity of
heme iron in lipid oxidation, ultimately affecting meat color29.T y p eIﬁbers
contain approximately four times more myoglobin than type IIB ﬁbers.
Muscles rich in type Iﬁbers exhibit a redder color (higher a* value) and are
generally preferred by consumers30. Type IIB ﬁbers contain more glycolytic
enzymes and sarcoplasmic reticulum. Post-slaughter anaerobic metabolites
from theseﬁbers may lead to PSE meat characteristics, characterized by pale
color (Pale), soft texture (Soft), and exudation (Exudative), typically asso-
ciated with higher lightness (L) values31. In Sunit sheep, the proportion of
type Iﬁbers in the biceps femoris (16.3%) was signiﬁcantly higher than in the
longissimus dorsi (8.7%) . Correspondingly, the a * value of the biceps
femoris was signiﬁcantly higher, and the L* value was signiﬁcantly lower
than those of the longissimus dorsi11.
Effect of muscle ﬁb e rt y p eo nm u t t o np H
pH is an important indicator of mutton freshness and quality. In general,
post-slaughter muscle pH declines more slowly in ruminants than in pork
and poultry, attributed to the higher proportion of slow-oxidizing muscle
ﬁbers in ruminants 32. Moreover, the rapid decline of pH will not only
destroy the combination of water and protein, but also affect the protein
characteristics of muscle tissue, which will adversely affect the color, water
holding capacity, tenderness and other meat quality indicators 33. Studies
have shown that an increased proportion of type Iﬁbers can delay the rate of
pH decline while improving water-holding capacity, juiciness, andﬂavor of
mutton. Because type I (slow-oxidative) ﬁbers are characterized by high
mitochondrial density, strong aerobic metabolism, low glycogen content,
and low glycolytic enzyme activity. After slaughter, oxygen depletion inhi-
bits oxidative phosphorylation, b ut the low glycogen reserve and weak
glycolysis capacity of type Iﬁbers lead to less lactate accumulation, thereby
slowing the rate of postmortem pH decline34. In contrast, muscles rich in
type IIB ﬁbers, due to their high glycogen content and rapid anaerobic
metabolic rate, lead to a rapid accumulation of lactic acid and phosphates
post-slaughter. This results in a signi ﬁcant decrease in pH and water-
holding capacity, along with substantial myoglobin denaturation and loss,
which in severe cases may contribute to the formation of PSE meat 35.A
correlation analysis between meat quality and ﬁber typing in 15 sheep
muscle revealed that in fast-contracting glycolytic muscles, larger fast-
contracting glycolytic ﬁbers and lower oxidative activity were typically
associated with a lower ﬁnal pH, whereas in slow-contracting oxidized
muscles, higher oxidative activity correlated with elevated 24-h pH and the
better water-holding capacity36. Reducing the percentage of type IIB and IIX
ﬁbers in ovine longissimus dorsi can decrease the extent of post-slaughter
pH decline, thereby improving meat quality37. The rate of pH decrease after
cooking affects the optimal pH for the Maillard reaction, thereby inﬂuencing
meat quality and ﬂavor characteristics. Studies have shown that pH value
inﬂuences the reaction activity between amino acids and reducing sugars,
thereby regulating the rate of the Maillard reaction and the formation of
ﬂavor compounds. The reaction rate is lower when pH falls below 6.0 38.
Speciﬁcally, a pH of ~5.5 has been identi ﬁed as the optimal pH for the
formation of volatile compounds in meat aroma39. Pre-slaughter stress can
also deplete muscle glycogen, leading to a slow pH decline and the formation
of dark, ﬁrm, and dry (DFD) meat, negatively impactingﬂavor40.
Effect of muscle ﬁb e rt y p eo nm u t t o nt e n d e r n e s s
Tenderness refers to the degree to which meat is easily chewed when eaten. It
is an important sensory characteristic of mutton quality and directly affects
the consumer's eating experience. T h es h e a rf o r c ei sc o m m o n l yu s e dt o
evaluate the tenderness of meat. The greater the shear force, the worse the
Fig. 1 | Classiﬁcation characteristics of four types of
muscle ﬁbers in mutton.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
tenderness. Muscleﬁber types inﬂuence tenderness through their diameter
and density. Studies have shown that theﬁner the muscleﬁbers between the
muscle bundles and the greater the density, the higher the deposition ability
of IMF than the varieties with thick muscleﬁbers and low density, and the
higher the tenderness of the meat and the juiciness41.T y p eI ﬁbers have a
smaller diameter and higher density; an increased proportion of theseﬁbers
reduces shear force, enhancing tenderness42.C o n v e r s e l y ,t y p eI I Bﬁbers have
a relatively larger diameter, which can reduce tenderness 43.S t u d i e sa l s o
show that in yak meat, the proportion of type Iﬁbers is negatively correlated
with shear force, meaning higher type Iﬁber proportion is associated with
lower shear force and better tenderness44. And increase in the number of
type I muscle ﬁbers will make beef more juicy and delicious, while the
number of type IIB muscle ﬁbers will increase the hardness of meat 45.
Resveratrol has been shown to promote the transformation of goat muscle
ﬁbers from fast-glycolytic to slow-oxidative types, reducing drip loss and
shear force, thereby improving tenderness 46. Double-muscling in sheep,
while increasing meat yield and economic beneﬁts, enlargesﬁber diameter,
subsequently leading to reduced tenderness and juiciness47. Furthermore,
after Callipyge mutates into the double-muscled sheep, the proportion of
fast-contracting glycolytic muscle ﬁbers (types IIB) increases, while the
proportion of slow-contracting oxidized muscles (type I) decreases
signiﬁcantly48.
Effects of muscle ﬁber types on mutton intramuscular fat
Intramuscular Fat (IMF) refers to fat located within the muscle and between
muscle ﬁbers. It signiﬁcantly inﬂuences meat tenderness, juiciness,ﬂavor,
and visual appearance49. When the IMF content is between 2% and 3%, the
taste of mutton is the best. And in a certain range, the higher the IMF
content, the lower the shear force, th e better the water retention perfor-
mance, the ﬁner the meat taste, and the better the quality 50. It has been
reported that IMF content is negativelycorrelated with the cross-sectional
area of muscle ﬁbers and the proportion of type IIB muscle ﬁbers, but
positively correlated with the proportion of type I muscle ﬁbers51.T h e
reason is that type I muscleﬁbers contain more neutral lipids, while type IIB
muscleﬁbers contain less neutral lipids. At the same time, the type I muscle
ﬁb e ri sa l s or i c hi np h o s p h o l i p i d s ,w h ich is positively correlated with the
juiciness of the meat, which plays an important role in the formation of
mutton ﬂavor during cooking52. Studies have also conﬁrmed that the pro-
portion of type I muscle ﬁbers in beef is positively correlated with the
amount of IMF deposition. The study also found that pig breeds with high
IMF content produce more volatile organic compounds during oxidation
due to their high content of UFAs in triglycerides, which gives the meat a
richer ﬂavor53. However, some scholars believe that there is no universal
relationship between IMF and muscle ﬁber type composition. The two
characteristics are relatively independent and can be manipulated
separately54.
Effect of muscle ﬁber type on mutton ﬂavor
The metabolic characteristics of muscleﬁbers have an important inﬂuence
on meat ﬂavor, which plays a role by affecting the formation and trans-
formation of ﬂavor substances. Oxidized muscle ﬁber contains more
mitochondria and myoglobin, which is conducive to theβ-oxidation of fatty
acids and the formation of some ﬂavor precursors, such as aldehydes,
ketones and other volatile ﬂavor substances. The increase of such muscle
ﬁber content can improve the umami andﬂavor richness of muscle. On the
contrary, the increase in the proportion of glycolytic muscleﬁbers may lead
to the accumulation of lactic acid, affect the pH value and water holding
capacity of the meat, and increase the sour and astringent taste of the meat55.
Besides type Iﬁber proportion showspositive correlations with the content
of essential amino acids like lysine, valine, and glutamic acid, thereby
enhancing nutritional quality andﬂavor precursor levels. In contrast, type
IIB ﬁber proportion shows negative correlations with amino acid content56.
In the ﬂavor study of Jinhua pork skeletal muscle conﬁrmed that muscles
predominantly composed of type I and type IIA (oxidized) muscleﬁbers are
Fig. 2 | The formation mechanism of mutton ﬂavor. A Mutton undergoes lipid
oxidation during heating or storage to produce volatile ﬂavor compounds (e.g.,
aldehydes, esters, etc.) and odor compounds (e.g., MOA, EOA). B Heating can
stimulate the Maillard reaction of free amino acids and reducing sugars in mutton,
producing pyrroles, pyrazines, furans and other compounds with roasted and burnt
ﬂavor. C The thiamine in mutton undergoes thermal degradation under neutral or
alkaline conditions, producing volatile aroma compounds containing nitrogen or
sulfur(e.g., thiocarbonyls, thiols, heterocyclic compounds, etc.). D There are various
microorganisms in the rumen of mutton (e.g., fat-degrading bacteria, protein-
degrading bacteria, acid-utilizing bacteria, etc.), which can react with feed, energy,
fat etc. to produce substances such as alcohols, esters, and acids that contribute
signiﬁcantly to the ﬂavor of mutton.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
rich in free amino acids, particularl y umami amino acids (aspartic acid,
glutamic acid) and sweet amino acids (alanine, glycine), which can enhance
the umamiﬂavor and mellow taste of meat. In contrast, muscles dominated
by type IIB ﬁbers, although abundant in volatile aldehydes, exhibit lower
total free amino acid levels and insufﬁcient umami intensity57.M o r e o v e r ,t h e
study through correlation heatmap a nalysis between the expression of
MyHC subtypes and speciﬁc volatile compounds. Found that MyHC IIB
and IIX subtypes were positively correlated with MOA and MNA. The two
branched chain fatty acid derivatives that are the main substances producing
the mutton gamey taste56.A sak e y ﬂavor precursor, phospholipids play a
decisive role in meat ﬂavor. The positive effect of type I muscle ﬁber on
ﬂavor may be due to its high phospholipid content, which can produce more
ﬂavor substances through thermal degr adation reaction. However, poly-
unsaturated fatty acids in phospholipids also increase the risk of fatty acid
oxidation and rancidity, leading to the formation of badﬂavor28.
Factors affecting the muscle ﬁber types, meat quality,
and ﬂavor in mutton
Breed and genotype
Muscle ﬁber characteristics are moderately to highly heritable. Due to dif-
ferences in genetic background, muscleﬁber type composition, distribution
proportions, and metabolic properties vary considerably among different
sheep breeds. In Sunit sheep, the diameter and cross-sectional area of var-
ious ﬁber types were signiﬁcantly lower than in Bamei mutton sheep and
Small-tailed Han sheep, which partly explains the superior meat quality of
Sunit sheep58.T h eﬁb e rd i a m e t e ri nt h el o n g i s s i m u sd o r s io ft h eH us h e e p
was smaller than that of the Dorset sheep, while the ﬁber density was
signiﬁcantly greater, indicating thatthe texture of the Hu sheep was ﬁner
and the tenderness was better59. This reveals that indigenous Chinese breeds
(e.g., Hu sheep, Sunit sheep) ﬁner typically have ﬁner ﬁbers and higher
oxidative potential compared to introduced meat breeds (e.g., Dorset),
which is related to their superio r meat quality traits. Regarding ﬂavor,
compared to goat meat, sheep meat is generally softer, more tender, and
juicier, with a higher IMF content, a relatively milder odor, and better edible
value60. Kazakh sheep meat is rich in protein, total essential amino acids, and
umami amino acids, with favorableﬂavor61, while Ujimqin sheep meat has
higher IMF content, a reasonable and diverse fatty acid composition, and a
rich ﬂavor62. However, in breeding programs, focusing solely on single traits
like “meat yield” is insufﬁcient. Setting a threshold for the ratio of type I to
type IIB ﬁbers could serve as a selection criterion for excellent mutton
breeds. This approach can maintain acertain growth rate while leveraging
the high phospholipid content of oxidativeﬁbers to promote lipid oxidation
a n do b t a i nm o r ea r o m a t i cc o m p o u n d s ,w h i l ea v o i d i n gt h ed e t e r i o r a t i o no f
tenderness associated with excessive glycolyticﬁbers.
On the other hand, genetic selection for favorable genes can improve
meat quality and ﬂavor. Muscle ﬁber types show moderate to high herit-
ability in sheep, pigs, and cattle. These features can be incorporated into
genome selection programs to enhance the muscleﬁber proﬁles and meat
quality traits in sheep, promoting high-quality development of the mutton
industry58. Research has found that increased FoxO1 gene expression is
negatively correlated with MyHC I mRNAlevels and positively correlated
with MyHC IIX and MyHC IIB levels, identifying it as a core regulator of
ﬁber type transformation63. The Halothane (Hal) gene can downregulate the
expression of type IIAﬁber gene and upregulate the expression of type IIX
ﬁber, increase the proportion of white (glycolytic) ﬁbers, and reduce meat
quality. The Rendement Napole (RN) gene mutation can decrease MyHC
IIB mRNA and promote IIA and IIX mRNA expression. Mutations in these
two genes altered the composition of muscle ﬁber type, ultimately having
anegative impact on meat quality traits 64. Furthermore, genes such as
Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL)65, Doublecortin-Like Kinase 1 (DCLK1) 66,a n d
Lipin-1 (LPIN1)67 can inﬂuence IMF deposition, indirectly affecting muscle
ﬁber type andﬂavor compound accumulation. These can serve as molecular
markers for assisted selection in thegenetic improvement of mutton quality
traits, accelerating industry development.
Age and sex
Age can change the direction of muscleﬁber type transformation to affect
meat quality. The proportion of oxidizedﬁb e ri sn e g a t i v e l yc o r r e l a t e dw i t h
age, while the proportion of glycolytic ﬁbers is positively correlated. The
number of muscleﬁbers is largelyﬁxed at birth, but theﬁber types can switch
in order from I → IIA → IIX → IIB. As age increases, the proportion of
oxidizedﬁbers gradually decreases, while the proportion of glycolyticﬁbers
increases. Fibers generally become thicker, and have an increased cross-
sectional area, which may lead to tougher texture and reduced tenderness68.
Table 2 | Regulatory mechanisms of muscle ﬁber types on meat quality and eating ﬂavor of mutton
Index Muscle ﬁber type Key mechanism/characteristic Impact on quality and ﬂavor
Meat color Type I
(Slow-oxidative)
High myoglobin content (~4× of type IIB)
higher a* value (redder color) 30
Positive: brighter red color, consumer preferred
Type IIB
(Fast-glycolytic)
High glycolytic enzyme content, rapid post-slaughter glycolysis associated with
PSE meat31
Negative: pale color, soft texture, exudation,
reduced acceptance
pH value Type I
(Slow-oxidative)
High mitochondrial density, low glycogen, weak glycolytic capacity → slower pH
decline
better water-holding capacity 34
Positive: better water-holding, juiciness
and ﬂavor
Type IIB
(Fast-glycolytic)
High glycogen content, rapid anaerobic metabolism→ rapid lactate accumulation
→ fast pH decline; risk of PSE meat 35
Negative: protein denaturation, drip loss,
reduced quality
Tenderness Type I
(Slow-oxidative)
Smaller diameter, higher density
reduced shear force
higher IMF deposition capacity 41,42
Positive: enhanced tenderness, ﬁner texture
Type IIB
(Fast-glycolytic)
Larger diameter, increased shear force, reduced tenderness43; Callipyge mutation
increases type IIB proportion 48
Negative: coarser texture, tougher meat
IMF Type I
(Slow-oxidative)
Rich in neutral lipids and phospholipids,
positively correlated with IMF deposition
enhances juiciness51,52
Positive: better marbling, juiciness, ﬂavor
richness
Type IIB
(Fast-glycolytic)
Low neutral lipid content,
negatively correlated with IMF;
increased meat hardness 51,52
Negative: lower fat deposition
Flavor Type I & IIA
(Oxidative)
Rich in phospholipids and free amino acids (Glu, Asp, Ala, Gly), promotes lipid
oxidation ﬂavor precursors and enhances umami 57
Positive: rich ﬂavor, strong umami, nutritional
quality
Type IIB & IIX
(Glycolytic)
Positive correlation with MOA, MNA (mutton odor compounds); lower free amino
acid levels, insuf ﬁcient umami intensity 56,57
Negative: strong mutton odor
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
Studies report that the Longissimus dorsi of 7-day-old Bamei and Landrace
pigs was rich in Type IIA and IIXﬁbers, but by 180 days, these proportions
signiﬁcantly decreased, while the proportion of type IIB ﬁber signiﬁcantly
increased, and the change in Landrace pigs are more pronounced69.B o t h
Xinjiang brown cattle and Angus cattle showed a trend of decreasing type I
ﬁber density with age (from 3 to 24 months) during the growth stage70.A g e
can also affect the deposition of IMF in muscles, as well as the accumulation
of chemical compositions andﬂavor compounds. Meat from young mutton
is tender, withﬁne ﬁbers and low connective tissue content, butﬂavor may
be less developed. As age increase, mutton ﬁbers coarsen, fat deposition
increases, fatty acid composition changes, and the levels of some ﬂavor
precursors change, leading to a decrease in tenderness and a more pro-
nounced ﬂavor71. In Sunit sheep, the content of polyunsaturated fatty acid
(PUFA) in muscle signi ﬁcantly decreased with age, while the content of
saturated fatty acid (SFA) and stearic acid gradually increased, leading to an
increase in the accumulation of mutton odor compounds72.
Gender affects the quality, ﬂavor, muscle ﬁber characteristics, and
chemical composition of mutton through hormone levels. Generally, rams
grow faster have more developed muscle, but their meat tends to be coarser,
with largerﬁber diameter and stronger odor. This is because the higher levels
of androgen in rams promote fat metabolism, alter the content and com-
position of short-chain and unsaturated fatty acids in fat, and enhance meat
odor. Ewe meat is relatively tender, with the smallest ﬁb e rd i a m e t e ra n d
milder odor73. Castrated male sheep (wethers) have increased levels of
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), and
decreased levels of gonadotropins and the male hormone testosterone. This
hormonal change effectively reducesthe synthesis of branched-chain fatty
acids associated with mutton odor, lowers meat odor, and signi ﬁcantly
improves ﬂavor74. In agricultural practices, raising castrated male sheep is
recommended. If balancing reproduction and meat quality is needed, ewes
are a secondary option, but direct fattening of intact rams should be avoided.
Feeding methods
Ruminant feeding systems primarily include natural grazing, house feeding,
and supplementary feeding grazing. Under these systems, theﬂavor proﬁles
of animal products and muscleﬁber types differ. Grazing increases animal
movement and promotes the development of oxidative (type I) ﬁbers. In
addition, PUFA from pasture can be incorporated into muscle, resulting in a
more natural and complex mutton ﬂavor75.C o n v e r s e l y ,c o nﬁnement sys-
tems may increase the proportion of glycolytic (type IIB) ﬁbers while
accelerating weight gain. High-grain diets in conﬁnement can also produce
more propionic acid in the rumen, le ading to increased deposition of
branched-chain fatty acids associated with mutton odor 5.S t u d i e sa l s o
showed that compared with conﬁnement-fed sheep, grazing sheep have the
ﬁnest ﬁbers, signiﬁcantly higher MyHC I expression, and signiﬁcantly lower
MyHC IIA and MyHC IIB expression. The shear force values and certain
color parameters (L* and b*)w e r ea l s os i g n iﬁcantly decreased in grazing
sheep76. When Sunit sheep were raised under three different feeding
regimes, the con ﬁnement group had the highest proportion of type IIB
ﬁbers, while the grazing and supplementary grazing groups had higher
proportions of type I and IIA ﬁbers, resulting in tender meat28, indicating
grazing can enhance mutton quality andﬂavor. However, grazing systems
have longerﬁnishing cycles, resulting in lighter carcasses in the short term,
making it difﬁcult to meet the premium mutton standards quickly. They
also bring greater pressure to grassland resources and lower economic
efﬁciency. In order to accelerate fattening, a combination system of daytime
grazing with morning and evening supplemental feeding is often adopted.
This model not only shortens theﬁnishing cycle and saves feeding costs but
also meets daily nutritional needs, producing high-quality mutton77.
Dietary nutrition
Nutrition is crucial for muscleﬁber growth. Dietary energy, protein levels,
and additives can inﬂuence ﬁber type composition by modulating muscle
ﬁber metabolism. Studies feeding Hu sheep with different energy level diets
found that reducing dietary energy level decreasedﬁber area, increasedﬁber
density, and improved meat quality 78. However, other research suggests
appropriately increasing dietary energy levels in pigs can increase the pro-
portion of oxidative ﬁbers, thereby improving meat quality 79. Supple-
menting the diet of Duhan crossbred sheep with 100 mg/kg fermented
wheat bran polysaccharides signiﬁcantly increased the expression of oxi-
dativeﬁber-related genes in the Longissimus dorsi, decreased the expression
of intermediateﬁber genes and shear force values, improving tenderness80.
Adding different doses of allicin to the diet of Guizhou black goats found
that allicin promoted the transformation ofﬁber types from type II to type I,
improved meat quality by regulating relevant enzyme activities and gene
expression, and also altered fatty acid composition and amino acid proﬁles
in mutton, thereby affecting the generation of volatileﬂavor compounds81.
Furthermore, dietary components directly in ﬂuence ﬂavor compound
accumulation. Adding 3% compound Chinese herbal medicine reduced
EOA and MNA content in mutton, lessening odor82. Feeding sainfoin rich in
tannins not only inhibits partial o xidation of fatty acids in the rumen,
increasing n-3 PUFA content, but also minimizes unpleasant odors from
forage, improving mutton ﬂavor83. In practice, combined strategies like
“low-energy restricted feeding plus antioxidant supplementation” can be
employed to slow the rate ofﬁber conversion to glycolytic types and improve
meat quality and ﬂavor.
Other key factors
Heat, transportation, pre-slaughter stress, and post-slaughter handling can
all affect the muscleﬁber structure andﬂavor compound release of mutton.
Heat stress (HS) can accelerate the conversion of oxidative muscle ﬁbers
(type I) to glycolytic muscle ﬁbers (type II), thereby increasing anaerobic
metabolism in muscle. This shift elevates the rate of lactate accumulation
post-slaughter, accelerates muscle pH decline, and results in tougher meat
with reduced water-holding capacit y. Furthermore, HS activates the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and increases cortisol secretion.
Cortisol inhibits muscle protein synthesis and promotes protein degrada-
tion; increased protein degradation further reduces the levels of umami
amino acids such as glutamic acid and aspartic acid, leading to a decrease in
high-quality ﬂavor compounds84. Transportation stress is a signi ﬁcant
source of pre-slaughter stress, which promotes glycogenolysis and anaerobic
glycolysis by activating the AMPK signaling pathway. In Hu sheep subjected
to 8 h of long-distance transportation, muscle glycogen content was sig-
niﬁcantly decreased on day 0, while the activities of lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and hexokinase (HK) were mark edly elevated, indicating that
transportation stress accelerates glycolytic metabolism in muscle ﬁbers85.
Depletion of muscle glycogen leads to an abnormal rate of post-slaughter
pH decline, which may result in the occurrence of PSE or DFD meat. In
addition, transportation stress increases the shear force value of mutton,
reduces meat tenderness, and decreases IMF content, leading to a drier
texture and inferiorﬂavor86. Goats transported for 6 h during the hot season
exhibited higher pH value, drip losses, and shear force, while signiﬁcantly
shortening sarcomere length and deteriorating meat quality87.P r e - s l a u g h t e r
stress can be divided into long-term chronic stress and short-term acute
stress, both of which can affect the muscleﬁber types and enzyme activity of
mutton. Oxidative muscleﬁbers (type I) are rich in succinate dehydrogenase
(SDH) and cytochromeoxidase, whereas glycolytic muscleﬁbers (type IIB)
are abundant in LDH and phosphoryla se. Under stress conditions, LDH
activity in type IIBﬁbers signiﬁcantly increases, accelerating the production
of lactic acid56. Studies on the intervention of α- l i p o i ca c i dh a v ed e m o n -
strated that the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1α signaling pathway can promote the
transformation of muscle ﬁbers from type IIB to type IIA, reduce LDH
activity, and enhance SDH activity, thereby improving meat quality88.T h i s
indicates that pre-slaughter stress management can improve meat quality by
regulating enzyme activities related to muscle ﬁber types. In addition, the
duration of lairage is crucial for relieving animal stress. Research have shown
that muscle glycogen levels in Small-tailed Han sheep partially recover after
24 h of lairage following transport. However, excessive grazing time
(exceeding 12 h) may lead to the accumulation of additional stress 89.
Regarding the post-slaughter processing of mutton, such as chilling method
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
Table 3 | Factors affecting muscle ﬁber types, meat quality, and ﬂavor in mutton
Inﬂuencing factor Speci ﬁc condition Effect on muscle ﬁber types Impact on meat quality and ﬂavor Practical application
Breed/geno-type Indigenous vs Introduced
breeds
Indigenous breeds have smaller ﬁber diameter, higher
oxidative potential and better meat quality 59
Indigenous breeds: superior tenderness,
ﬂavor, lower odor
Select indigenous breeds for premium quality; use I/IIB
ratio as selection criterion
Gene expression and gene
mutations
FoxO1: negatively correlated with MyHC I positively
correlated with MyHC IIX and IIB 63
Alters ﬁber type composition toward glycolytic
phenotype
Molecular marker for assisted selection in breeding
programs
Hal: increases type IIX
RN: decreases MyHC IIB, promotes IIA and IIX 64
Negative impact on meat quality traits Avoid unfavorable genotypes in breeding programs
Age Young vs Adult Type I ﬁber density decreases, ﬁbers become thicker, type IIB
increases signiﬁcantly with age 69
Decreased tenderness; more pronounced
ﬂavor; coarser texture 68
Optimize slaughter age for desired quality (typically
younger for tenderness)
Sex Rams Larger ﬁber diameter, more developed muscle, higher
glycolytic ﬁber proportion107
Coarser meat, stronger odor due to higher
androgen levels108
Avoid direct fattening of intact rams for quality meat
production
Ewes Smallest ﬁber diameter, mildest odor, better tenderness 73 Tender meat, mild odor Mainly used for breeding and production
Wethers Increased FSH/LH, decreased testosterone; reduced
branched-chain fatty acids 74
Reduced mutton odor, improved ﬂavor109 Mainly used for fattening
Feeding methods Grazing Higher MyHC I expression, lower MyHC IIA/IIB; ﬁner ﬁbers76 More natural ﬂavor; higher PUFA 75 Premium quality production; suitable for grassland areas
Conﬁnement Higher type IIB proportion; accelerated weight gain; more
propionic acid75
Increased mutton odor (branched-chain fatty
acids); faster growth
Commercial production; requires odor mitigation
strategies
Supplementary feeding Higher type I and IIA proportions; tender meat 110 Shortened ﬁnishing cycle; high-quality mutton
production111
Cost-effective with acceptable quality
Dietary nutrition Energy restriction Decreased ﬁber area, increased ﬁber density, improved meat
quality78
Improved meat quality through ﬁber density
increase
Strategy for improving meat quality in feedlot systems
Feed additive Fermented wheat bran polysaccharides: oxidative ﬁber ↑,
intermediate ﬁber ↓80
Reduced shear force; improved tenderness 80 Functional feed additive for quality improvement
Allicin supplementation: Promotes Type II → Type I
transformation; improves meat quality 81
Altered fatty acid and amino acid pro ﬁles;
reduced odor compounds 81
Natural feed additive for ﬁber type modulation and ﬂavor
improvement
Other factors Heat stress/transportation
stress
Heat stress: Accelerates Type I → Type II conversion;
increases anaerobic metabolism 112
Reduced water-holding capacity; tougher
meat; decreased umami amino acids 84
Implement cooling and stress reduction measures pre-
slaughter, and optimize transportation duration
Transportation stress: Activates AMPK pathway; accelerates
glycolytic metabolism; glycogen depletion 85
Increased shear force; reduced tenderness;
lower IMF; PSE/DFD risk 86
Post-slaughter aging Myo ﬁbrillar protein degradation; improved tenderness; ﬂavor
precursor release91
Stabilized protein solubility, full ﬂavor
precursor release92
Control aging conditions (temperature, time) for optimal
quality
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
and aging time, research has indicated that ultra-rapid chilling can delay
glycolysis rate and improve tenderness by increasing the phosphorylation
levels of aldolase A (ALDOA), phosp hofructokinase (PFKM), and phos-
phoglycerate kinase (PGK), while inhibiting their acetylation levels 90.
However, inappropriate rapid chillingmay lead to excessive contraction of
muscle ﬁbers, shortened sarcomere length, and increased meat hardness.
Post-slaughter aging is a key process for the degradation of myo ﬁbrillar
structural proteins and the formation of ﬂavor compounds. Myoﬁbrillar
proteins are degraded by endogenous enzymes such as calpains, cathepsins,
and proteasomes, leading to muscleﬁber fragmentation, increased myoﬁ-
brillar fragmentation index (MFI), and improved tenderness91.S t u d i e sh a v e
found that the period of 24 – 48 h post-slaughter in goats represents a
superior stage for meat tenderization, during which changes in myoﬁbrillar
protein solubility stabilize, and ﬂavor precursors are fully released92.T h e
effects of various intrinsic and extrinsic factors on muscle ﬁber types and
their consequent impacts on meat quality andﬂavor are comprehensively
summarized in Table3.
Molecular regulation of muscle ﬁber type
transformation
Different muscle ﬁber types exhibit signi ﬁcant differences in metabolic
characteristics, contractile function, and energy supply, directly inﬂuencing
meat quality traits such as tenderness, color, andﬂavor. The transformation
of muscle ﬁber types is regulated by a comp lex molecular network. This
network involves the coordinated interplay of multiple transcription factors
and signaling pathways that collectively determine the directional differ-
entiation of muscleﬁbers toward oxidative (typeI & IIA) or glycolytic (type
IIX & IIB) phenotypes. The underlying regulatory mechanisms are detailed
in Fig. 3 and Table 4.
Transcription factor regulatory network
Transcription factors regulating muscleﬁber types mainly include peroxi-
some proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α), Sox 6,
Mafs, IRX5, etc. PGC-1α plays an important role in regulating mitochon-
drial synthesis, energy substrate utilization and oxidative metabolism during
muscle ﬁber formation93. It was found that the activity of genes related to
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism in type II muscle ﬁbers of mice was
signiﬁcantly enhanced after overexpression of PGC-1α in transgenic mice
driven by muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene promoter94. In addition, by
constructing a PGC-1α-deﬁcient mouse model, we observed a signi ﬁcant
c h a n g ei nt h et y p eo fs k e l e t a lm u s c l eﬁbers in mice. The proportion of
oxidized ﬁbers in the muscle decreased, while the proportion of glycolytic
ﬁbers increased. These ﬁndings conﬁrm that PGC-1 α is a key factor in
regulating muscleﬁber type conversion and can induce the transition from
fast muscleﬁbers to slow muscleﬁbers95. In humans, the expression of PGC-
1α was positively correlated with oxidized muscle ﬁbers (type I) and
negatively correlated with glycolytic muscle ﬁbers (type IIB) 96.S o x6i s
enriched in the expression of fast muscle ﬁber genes, and promotes the
transformation of slow muscle to fa st muscle by inhibiting slow muscle
genes97. Transcription factor Mafs can speciﬁcally bind to the MYH4 pro-
moter to increase the formation of type IIB muscleﬁbers98. The study also
found that IRX5 can inhibit glycolysis and activate PGC-1 α expression,
thereby promoting slow muscle differentiation99.
Signaling pathway regulation
The main signaling pathways regulating the transformation of muscleﬁber
types include calcium signaling pathway, FOXO signaling pathway, MAPK-
related pathway, PI3K/AKT pathway, etc. The Ca2 + signaling pathway
includes calcineurin (Ca N) and calc ium-dependent protein kinase (Ca
MK). Lactic acid is a muscle factor. In the Ca N signaling pathway, lactic acid
can increase the concentration of intracellular Ca2 +, promote the
dephosphorylation of nuclear factor of activated T-cells cytoplasmic
(NFATc) in myotubes, activate th e Ca N/NFATc1 signaling pathway,
increase muscle endurance, and induce the conversion of muscleﬁber types
to slow muscleﬁbers100. The increase of Ca2+ can lead to the increase of p38
MAPK phosphorylation level in PPAR γ overexpression pigs, which can
stimulate MEF 2 and PGC-1 α to affect muscle ﬁber type and oxidation
ability, and promote the transformation of muscleﬁbers from fast muscle to
slow muscle101. In the Ca MK signaling pathway, the Ca MK signaling
pathway promotes the phosphorylation of histone deacetylase 4 (HDAC4)
by activating CaMKII kinase, signiﬁcantly increases the nuclear expression
of HDAC4, and promotes the transformation of muscleﬁber type from fast
muscle to slow muscle102. FOXO signaling pathway is related to muscleﬁber
type and can promote the expression of fast muscle ﬁber related genes.
Knockout of foxo gene in aged mice can signiﬁcantly increase the diameter
of soleus muscle ﬁbers103. Overexpression of PKA catalytic subunit can
induce muscleﬁber transition from fast muscleto slow muscle by inhibiting
the activity of foxo104. Adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) is a serine/threonine protein kinase widely present in eukaryotic
cells, serving as a key regulator of intracellular energy metabolism. It pri-
marily includes extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK), c-Jun N-
terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 MAPK 105, which can regulate ﬁber type
transformation through their respect ive signaling pathways. The signal
transduction of ERK1/2 can promote the expression of fast muscle ﬁber
phenotype and inhibit the expression of slow muscleﬁber phenotype. It is
further conﬁrmed that phosphorylated ERK1/2 can promote the transfor-
mation of muscle ﬁber type from slow muscle ﬁber to fast muscle ﬁber106.
Research has revealed that in the biceps femoris muscle of Mongolian sheep,
AMPK activity along with the expression of AMPKα2a n dP G C - 1α genes
can promote the transformation of muscle ﬁber types from MyHC IIX,
MyHC IIA, and MyHC IIB to MyHC I. This shift alters muscle ﬁber
composition and ultimately in ﬂuences meat quality 76.T h e s e ﬁndings
Fig. 3 | Molecular regulatory mechanisms under-
lying muscle ﬁber type transformation. The left
panel represents pathways promoting the formation
of slow-twitch/oxidative ﬁbers (Type I & IIA),
whereas the right panel depicts pathways driving
fast-twitch/glycolytic ﬁber (Type IIX & IIB) devel-
opment. Green arrows denote activation or pro-
motion, while red arrows indicate inhibition or
blockade. Signals are transduced from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus, ultimately regulating gene
expression.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
Table 4 | Molecular regulation of muscle ﬁber type transformation
Regulatory
category
Molecular
regulator
Regulatory mechanism Fiber type
transformation
direction
Downstream targets Functional consequence for
meat quality
Potential application in mutton
production
Transcription
Factors
PGC-1α Master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis
and oxidative metabolism 93; drives slow-
twitch ﬁber formation95
Type II → Type I ↑ Mitochondrial genes,
oxidative enzymes (SDH,
COX)88,113
Improved tenderness, color
stability, ﬂavor richness114;
enhanced oxidative capacity 115
Key target for genetic selection and
nutritional intervention to improve
quality
Sox6 Repressor of slow muscle ﬁber genes;
promotes fast muscle ﬁber gene
expression97
Type I → Type II ↓ MyHC I, slow ﬁber genes; ↑
MyHC II B, fast ﬁber genes116
Potential negative impact on meat
quality (increased glycolytic
ﬁbers)34
Marker to avoid in breeding programs;
target for inhibition to maintain quality
Mafs Binds to MYH4 promoter to enhance type II B
ﬁber formation and fast-twitch phenotype 98
Type I/II A → Type II B ↑ MYH4 expression; ↑ Type II B
ﬁber formation98
May reduce tenderness and
increase cooking loss 117
Understanding fast ﬁber
development; manage to prevent
excessive glycolytic conversion
IRX5 Inhibits glycolysis and activates PGC-1 α
expression; promotes slow muscle
differentiation99
Type II → Type I ↓ glycolytic gene expression;
enhanced adipogenesis99
Potential candidate genes for
meat quality118
Novel target for promoting oxidative
ﬁber development and quality
improvement
Signaling
Pathways
Ca²⁺/CaN/
NFATc1
Lactic acid increases intracellular Ca² ⁺,
promotes NFATc1 dephosphorylation,
induces slow ﬁber conversion100
Type II → Type I ↑ Slow ﬁber endurance;
↑ oxidative metabolism;
activated by lactic acid
Enhanced muscle endurance;
improved postmortem meat
quality (slower pH decline) 119
Lactic acid-based interventions;
exercise regimens to promote
oxidative ﬁbers
Ca²⁺/
CaMKII/HDAC4
CaMKII phosphorylates HDAC4, increases
nuclear HDAC4 expression, promotes fast-
to-slow ﬁber transition102
Type II → Type I ↑ Nuclear HDAC4; histone
deacetylation; slow ﬁber gene
activation102
Improved oxidative capacity;
better color and water-holding
capacity101,120
Target for epigenetic modulation of
ﬁber type; calcium supplementation
strategies
FOXOs Promotes fast muscle ﬁber-related gene
expression; knockout increases soleus
muscle ﬁber diameter103
Type I → Type II ↑ Fast ﬁber genes; muscle
atrophy prevention; age-related
ﬁber changes103
Potential positive impact on
tenderness121
Age-related quality management;
FOXO inhibitors for aged animal meat
quality
ERK1/2 Phosphorylated ERK1/2 promotes fast ﬁber
phenotype and inhibits slow ﬁber phenotype
expression106
Type I → Type II ↑ Fast ﬁber phenotype markers;
↓ Slow ﬁber phenotype
markers106
Shift toward glycolytic phenotype;
faster pH decline; reduced water-
holding122
Avoid excessive ERK activation;
manage stress to prevent fast ﬁber
dominance
PKA Induces ﬁber transition from fast to slow by
inhibiting FOXO activity through
phosphorylation104
Type II → Type I ↓ FOXO transcriptional activity;
muscle plasticity regulation 104
Muscle ﬁber plasticity; potential
for quality improvement through
exercise/nutrition123
Exercise mimetics; PKA activators for
ﬁber type optimization
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
demonstrate that the AMPK/PGC-1α signaling pathway regulates postnatal
muscleﬁber type conversion. Therefore, modulating this signaling pathway
represents a potential strategy to increase the proportion of oxidativeﬁbers
and thereby enhance meat quality.
Conclusion and prospects
Mutton quality andﬂavor are core factors restricting consumer acceptance
and industrial development, and muscleﬁber type composition is the key
determinant regulating mutton color, pH, tenderness, juiciness, intramus-
cular fat deposition, andﬂavor compound formation. This review system-
atically clariﬁes the inﬂuence of muscleﬁber types on the quality andﬂavor
formation of mutton, revealing the regulatory mechanisms of muscleﬁber
types on meat quality and ﬂavor formation. And comprehensively sum-
marize the key in ﬂuencing factors and molecular regulatory networks
underlying muscleﬁber type transformation, providing theoretical support
for the genetic improvement and pr ecise production of high-quality
mutton.
Oxidized muscle ﬁbers (Types I and IIA) are ﬁner diameters, higher
levels of myoglobin and phospholipid content, which enhance the mutton
tenderness, juiciness, and ﬂavor richness. In contrast, the diameter of gil-
colytic ﬁbers (type IIB) is usually thicker and positively correlated with
indicators such as shear force and c ooking loss, while s howing negative
correlations with other meat quality parameters. The increase in the pro-
portion of type II B ﬁbers can also increase the content of special ﬂavor
compounds such as MOA, EOA and MNA. In severe cases, may lead to PSE
meat. Therefore, type I and type IIA muscle ﬁbers can be targeted as key
selection indicators in mutton production. Furthermore, the transformation
of muscle ﬁber types is coordinately regulated by a series of transcription
factors and signaling pathways. Targeted intervention in these regulatory
networks is crucial for increasingthe proportion of oxidized muscleﬁbers
and improving meat quality andﬂavor.
The continuous development of modern molecular biotechnology has
provided a multi-dimensional research method for muscle tissue research.
However, current research still has shortcomings. Firstly, the molecular
regulatory mechanisms linking muscleﬁber types and ﬂavor compounds
are not fully elucidated; for instance, the pathways connecting phospholipid
metabolism andﬁber types require further clariﬁcation. Secondly, there is a
lack of data supporting the distribution patterns and regulation methods of
high marble patterned muscle ﬁber types in mutton. Thirdly, existing
research predominantly focuses on a few high-value commercial cuts like
the longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris, lacking a systematic under-
standing of the dynamic distribution and transformation patterns ofﬁbers
in different body parts.
Based on this, future research can focus on three areas. Firstly, utilizing
multi-omics technologies to identify key genes and signaling pathways
regulating muscle ﬁber type transformation. Secondly, study the muscle
ﬁber characteristics of high-marbling grade mutton and establish an accu-
rate model between ﬁber type and ﬂavor quality. Thirdly, develop a com-
prehensive technical system that integrates“genetic selection+ nutritional
regulation + management practices.” This system aims to guide ﬁbers
toward the ideal types, while identifying molecular markers closely linked to
desirable ﬁber types and low-odor traits. These markers can be used for
molecular design breeding of mutton quality to accelerate the development
of new breeds. Furthermore, incorporating rapid detection technologies like
electronic noses and electronic tongues to establish a more comprehensive
evaluation system for mutton quality and ﬂavour, facilitating precise
assessment and control of meat attributes.
Data availability
No original experimental data were generated in this review. The data
supporting the tables and ﬁgures are derived from previously published
studies, databases and reports, all of which are cited in the manuscript. The
curated information extracted from these sources and used to generate the
summary tables and schematicﬁgures. Additional details are available from
the corresponding authorupon reasonable request.
Received: 11 March 2026; Accepted: 6 September 2026;
References
1. Yang, D. et al. Formation mechanisms of odor substances in mutton
and deodorization methods: a review.Food Sci. 45, 331–341 (2024).
2. Statistics, N. B. o. The 2024 economic performance achieved steady
progress with the successful realization of major development goals.
China Stat. 4, 7 (2025).
3. Alcalde, M. J., Ripoll, G., Campo, M. M., Horcada, A. & Panea, B.
Relationship between consumers’perceptions about goat kid meat
and meat sensory appraisal. Animals 13, 2383 (2023).
4. Hamad, B., Hadef, L. & Bellabidi, M. Motivations and obstacles to
goat meat consumption willingness: exploring in ﬂuencing factors
related to consumer habits and awareness. Cogent Food Agric. 10,
2303824 (2024).
5. Schreurs, N. M., Lane, G. A., Tavendale, M. H., Barry, T. N. &
McNabb, W. C. Pastoralﬂavour in meat products from ruminants fed
fresh forages and its amelioration by forage condensed tannins.
Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 146, 193–221 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
anifeedsci.2008.03.002 (2008).
6. Tursun, N. G. The Correlation Study of Muscle Fiber Characterstics
and Meat Quality with Meat Production of Local Sheep Breeds in
Xinjiang (Xinjiang Agricultural University, Xinjiang, 2015).
7. Listrat, A. et al. How muscle structure and composition in ﬂuence
meat and ﬂesh quality. ScientiﬁcWorldJournal 2016, 3182746
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3182746 (2016).
8. Brooke, M. H. & Kaiser, K. K. Three “myosin adenosine
triphosphatase” systems: the nature of their pH lability and sulfhydryl
dependence. J. Histochem Cytochem 18, 670–672 https://doi.org/
10.1177/18.9.670 (1970).
9. Jouffroy, F. K., Medina, M. F., Renous, S. & Gasc, J. P.
Immunocytochemical characteristics of elbow, knee and ankle
muscles of the ﬁve-toed jerboa (Allactaga elater). J. Anat. 202,
373–386 https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-7580.2003.00167.x (2003).
10. Chang, J. Effects of α-lipoic acid on growth performance, meat
quality, and muscle ﬁber type transformation of Tan sheep. Ningxia
Universty, https://doi.org/10.27257/d.cnki.gnxhc.2024.000642
(2024).
11. Li, J. et al. Muscle ﬁber and meat quality characteristics of
longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris in Sunit sheep. Food Sci. 46,
22–30 (2025).
12. Zhou, L., Wu, Z. Y., Zhang, F. S., Gui, L. S. & Hou, S. Z. Analysis of
histological characteristics of muscleﬁbers in different parts of black
Tibetan sheep. J. Sichuan Agric. Univ. 39, 778– 783 https://doi.org/
10.16036/j.issn.1000-2650.2021.06.010 (2021).
13. Fu, Y. J., Zhang, Q. D., Fan, W. & Ma, S. S. Research progress on the
applications of omics technologies in food ﬂavor analysis. J. Henan
Univ. Technol. 46, 135–147 https://doi.org/10.16433/j.1673-2383.
202501060003 (2025).
14. Wei, Z. Y., Hei, S. H., Wei, Z. J. & You, L. Q. Analysis of volatile ﬂavor
characteristics of popcorn chicken with different frying times
usinggas chromatography-ion mobility spectrometry and electronic
nose combined with chemometrics. Meat Res. 39,6 1–67 (2025).
15. Yang, Z. et al. Analysis of the effects of hydroxyl radicals on the
volatile ﬂavor composition and lipid pro ﬁle of sheep meat based on
HS-SPME-GC-MS and UPLC-MS/MS studies. Food Chem. 484,
144161 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2025.144161 (2025).
16. Liu, W., Tang, D. & Ao, C. Adding of Allium mongolicum regel
extracts to lamb feedlot diets inﬂuences 4-alkyl-branched fatty acids
deposition and the meat quality during storage. Meat Sci. 193,
108951 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2022.108951 (2022).
17. Watkins, P. J. et al. Effect of branched-chain fatty acids,
3-methylindole and 4-methylphenol on consumer sensory scores of
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
grilled lamb meat. Meat Sci. 96, 1088–1094 https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.meatsci.2012.08.011 (2014).
18. Wang, J. X. Study on the Effect of Adding Jasmine Floewer Residue
to Diets on Diets Onmeat Quality and Flavor of Goats (Guangxi
University, 2023). https://doi.org/10.27034/d.cnki.ggxiu.2023.
001186
19. Zhao, J. S. et al. Effect of thermal reaction conditions on the
formation of key intermediates in glucose ⁃free ammonia maillard
reaction system. Food Res. Dev. 46,1 0–14+54 (2025).
20. Chen, J. & Zhang, Y. Research progress on formation and
inﬂuencing factors of mutton ﬂavor. Feed Ind. 41,2 2–26 (2020).
21. Zhang, Q. & Ao, C. Research advances in mutton ﬂavor. J. Animal
Nutr. 367–371 (2006).
22. Ren, G. D. & Luo, H. L. Advances in sources and determination
techniques of mutton ﬂavor. Chin. J. Anim. Nutr. 37, 3519– 3531
(2025).
23. Liang, R., Zhao, B., Fang, Y. & Zhong, R. Research advance of
formation pathway of mutton volatile ﬂavor substances and its
regulation. J. Anim. Nutr. 36, 6872–6881 (2024).
24. Del Bianco, S. et al. In ﬂuence of dietary cardoon meal on volatile
compounds and ﬂavour in lamb meat.Meat Sci. 163, 108086 https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2020.108086 (2020).
25. Seoni, E. et al. Effect of condensed tannins from Birdsfoot trefoil and
dietary protein level on growth performance, carcass composition
and meat quality of ram lambs. Small Rumin. Res. 169, 118–126
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smallrumres.2018.07.021 (2018).
26. Han, W. J. Study on caused mutton odor material and their formation
mechanism from sheep adipose tissue (2010).
27. Vasta, V. & Priolo, A. Ruminant fat volatiles as affected by diet. A
review. Meat Sci. 73, 218–228 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.
2005.11.017 (2006).
28. Feng, Q., Wen, J., Xu, Y. & Yue, X. Research progress on regulatory
factors of muscle ﬁber characteristics and its effect on meat quality
of livestock. China Anim. Husb. Vet. Med. 52, 1057–1069 (2025).
29. Shleikin, A. G. & Medvedev, Y. V. Role of peroxidation and heme
catalysis in coloration of raw meat. Acta Sci. Pol. Technol. Aliment
13, 123–127 https://doi.org/10.17306/j.afs.2014.2.1 (2014).
30. Henckel, P., Oksbjerg, N., Erlandsen, E., Barton-Gade, P. &
Bejerholm, C. Histo- and biochemical characteristics of the
Longissimus dorsi muscle in pigs and their relationships to
performance and meat quality. Meat Sci. 47, 311–321 https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0309-1740(97)00063-6 (1997).
31. Wang, Y., Zhang, D. & Liu, Y. Research progress on the regulating
factors of muscle ﬁber heterogeneity in livestock: a review. Animals
14, 2225 (2024).
32. Matarneh, S. K., Silva, S. L. & Gerrard, D. E. New insights in muscle
biology that alter meat quality. Annu. Rev. Anim. Biosci. 9, 355–377
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-animal-021419-083902 (2021).
33. Li, M. et al. Effects of protein phosphorylation on color stability of
ground meat. Food Chem. 219, 304–310 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodchem.2016.09.151 (2017).
34. Mo, M. et al. Molecular mechanisms underlying the impact of muscle
ﬁber types on meat quality in livestock and poultry. Front. Vet. Sci.
10, 1284551 https://doi.org/10.3389/fvets.2023.1284551 (2023).
35. Li, B. J. et al. Progresses in research of the mechanisms of skeletal
muscle ﬁber formation. Sci. Agric. Sin. 47, 1200–1207 (2014).
36. Ithurralde, J. et al. Variation in instrumental meat quality among 15
muscles from 14-month-old sheep and its relationship with ﬁbre
typing. Anim. Prod. Sci. 58, 1358–1365 https://doi.org/10.1071/
an16013 (2017).
37. Yin, L. Q. Effect of Muscle Fiber Characteristics and MyHC Gene on
Meat Quality of Sunit Sheep in Different Feeding Conditions (In Inner
Mongolia Agricultural University, 2016).
38. Young, O. A. & Cummings, T. L. Effect of xylose on sheepmeat
ﬂavors in casserole-style cooking. J. Food Sci. 73, S308–S313
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2008.00831.x (2008).
39. Van Ba, H., Amna, T. & Hwang, I. Signi ﬁcant inﬂuence of particular
unsaturated fatty acids and pH on the volatile compounds in meat-
like model systems.Meat Sci.94, 480–488 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
meatsci.2013.04.029 (2013).
40. Liao, Z. Evaluation of Yongchang Mutton Quality (Lanzhou
University, Lanzhou, 2021).
41. Li, H. Y., Lu, T., Xia, M. S. & Hu, C. H. Research progress on the
growth and development of muscle ﬁbers in pigs. Anim. Husb. Vet.
Med. 41,9 3–95 (2009).
42. Yang, Y. Y. Effects of Concentrate and Pasture Feeding Systems on
Flavor and Tenderness of Yanchi Tan Sheep Meat (Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 2021).
43. Wang, Y. F. et al. Study on the difference of muscle ﬁber types and
qualityin different parts of Xinjiang brown cattle. Sci. Technol. Food
Ind. 39,1 9–24+37 https://doi.org/10.13386/j.issn1002-0306.2018.
06.004 (2018).
44. Wang, L. The Effect of Muscle Fiber Types and Their Differences in
Metabolic Enzymes Activity on Postmortem Tenderness of Yak Meat
(Gansu Agricultural University, 2016).
45. Choi, Y. M. & Kim, B. C. Muscle ﬁber characteristics, myoﬁbrillar
protein isoforms, and meat quality.Livest. Sci. 122, 105–118 https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2008.08.015 (2009).
46. Wu, S. Q., Liu, Y. F., Wei, Y. R., Huang, Y. N. & Jiang, Q. Y.
Mechanism of resveratrol regulating myo ﬁber type transformation
through PROX1/SIRT1 signaling pathway in goats. Acta Veterinaria
Zootechnica Sin. 56, 201–212 (2025).
47. Shackelford, S. D., Wheeler, T. L. & Koohmaraie, M. Effect of the
callipyge phenotype and cooking method on tenderness of several
major lamb muscles. J. Anim. Sci. 75, 2100–2105 https://doi.org/10.
2527/1997.7582100x (1997).
48. Li, J. et al. Impacts of the Callipyge mutation on ovine plasma
metabolites and muscle ﬁbre type. PLoS One 9, e99726 https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0099726 (2014).
49. Du, C. L., Tan, Y., Qi, J., Zhao, C. P. & Wang, J. Research progress on
the molecular biological basis of animal intramuscular fatand its
effect on meat quality. China Swine Ind. 20,4 0–49 https://doi.org/
10.16174/j.issn.1673-4645.2025.04.006 (2025).
50. Lambe, N. R. et al. Prediction of intramuscular fat content using CT
scanning of packaged lamb cuts and relationships with meat eating
quality. Meat Sci. 123, 112–119 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.
2016.09.008 (2017).
51. Maltin, C. A. et al. The effects of age at slaughter, genotype and
ﬁnishing system on the biochemical properties, muscle ﬁbre type
characteristics and eating quality of bull beef from suckled calves.
Anim. Sci. 66, 341–348 https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1357729800009462 (1998).
52. Calkins, C. R., Dutson, T. R., Smith, G. C., Carpenter, Z. L. & Davis, G.
W. Relationship of ﬁber type composition to marbling and
tenderness of bovine muscle. J. Food Sci. 46, 708–710 https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365-2621.1981.tb15331.x (1981).
53. Wang, B. et al. Construction of a molecular regulatory network for
lipids and volatile ﬂavor in Chinese indigenous and hybrid pig pork
through integrating multi-omics analysis. LWT 199, 116143 https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2024.116143 (2024).
54. Lefaucheur, L. A second look into ﬁbre typing-relation to meat
quality. Meat Sci. 84, 257–270 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.
2009.05.004 (2010).
55. Hwang, Y. H., Ismail, I. & Joo, S. T. The relationship between muscle
ﬁber composition and pork taste-traits assessed by electronic
tongue system. Korean J. Food Sci. Anim. Resour. 38, 1305–1314
https://doi.org/10.5851/kosfa.2018.e66 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
56. Fu, Y. et al. Effects of muscle ﬁber composition on meat quality,
ﬂavor characteristics, and nutritional traits in lamb. Foods 14, 2309
(2025).
57. Qi, K. et al. Unveiling the impact of muscle ﬁber composition on taste
and aroma compounds in Jinhua pig skeletal muscles. Food Chem.
493, 145764 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2025.145764
(2025).
58. Su, L. et al. Relationship between muscle ﬁber characteristics and
meat quality traits of Sunit sheep. Food Sci. 35,7 – 11 (2014).
59. Sun, W. et al. Histological characteristics analysis of longissimus
dorsi muscle in Hu sheep and its preliminary comparison with Dorset
sheep. Chin. J. Anim. Sci. 47,1 2–14+78 (2011).
60. Sen, A. R., Santra, A. & Karim, S. A. Carcass yield, composition and
meat quality attributes of sheep and goat under semiarid conditions.
Meat Sci. 66, 757–763 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1740(03)
00035-4 (2004).
61. Wang, M. & Hao, H. Meat quality characteristic differences of
different sheep breeds and genders. Food Res. Dev. 45,9 0–96
(2024).
62. Su, X. et al. Research progress on meat quality of Uzhumqin sheep.
Feed Res. 47, 165– 169 (2024).
63. Shi, X. E., Song, Z., Yang, Q. M., Liu, Y. G. & Yang, G. Correlation of
forkhead box transcription factor O1 and myosin heavy chain
isoforms in porcine skeletal muscle. Genet. Mol. Res. 13,
10231– 10240 https://doi.org/10.4238/2014.December.4.18 (2014).
64. Park, S. K., Gunawan, A. M., Schef ﬂer, T. L., Grant, A. L. & Gerrard, D.
E. Myosin heavy chain isoform content and energy metabolism can
be uncoupled in pig skeletal muscle. J. Anim. Sci. 87, 522–531
https://doi.org/10.2527/jas.2008-1269 (2009).
65. Liu, X. et al. Research progress on mutton quality evaluation
indicators and important candidate genes. J. Agric. Biotechnol. 28,
1881–1892 (2020).
66. Wang, Z. Y. Identiﬁcation of Key Genes and their Molecular
Regulatory Mechanisms in Intramuscular Fat Deposition in Hu Sheep
(Lanzhou University, 2024). https://doi.org/10.27204/d.cnki.glzhu.
2024.000387
67. Liang, P. et al. Screening candidate genes related to meat quality
traits in sheep based on transcriptome. Acta Agric. Boreal. Sin. 37,
220–231 (2022).
68. Xie, B. X., Huang, Y., Huang, H. T. & Lan, G. X. Research progress on
growth and development of pig muscle ﬁber and its in ﬂuencing
factors. Feed Res. 47, 168–171 https://doi.org/10.13557/j.cnki.
issn1002-2813.2024.16.029 (2024).
69. Yan, C. et al. Developmental changes of myo ﬁber of longissimus
dorsi muscle and adipocytes in bamei and landrace pigs. Genom.
Appl. Biol. 41, 981–992 https://doi.org/10.13417/j.gab.041.000981
(2022).
70. Tuersunbai, J. et al. The morphological comparison on the muscular
ﬁber of longissimus dorsi in different age between Xinjiang brown
cattle and Angus cattle. Heilongjiang An. Sci. Vet. Med.
63–67+71+167 (2020).
71. Zhang, X. et al. Effects of different feeding regimes on muscle
metabolism and its association with meat quality of Tibetan sheep.
Food Chem. 374, 131611 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2021.
131611 (2022).
72. Ao, L., Shuang, J. & Ao, C. Effects of age and fattening on the fatty
acid composition in the liver tissue of the Sunite sheep.Heilongjiang
Anim. Sci. Vet. Med. 17, 23 (2015).
73. Xue, L. N. & Zhou, S. H. Research progress on in ﬂuence factors and
candidate genes of characteristic ﬂavors substances. J. Shanxi
Agric. Sci. 48, 1347–1350 (2020).
74. Meng, X. R. et al. RNA-seq approach for identifying candidate genes
of meat quality in goats. Acta Veterinaria et. Zootechnica Sin. 46,
1300–1307 (2015).
75. Sinclair, L. A. Nutritional manipulation of the fatty acid composition
of sheep meat: a review. J. Agric. Sci. 145, 419–434 https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0021859607007186 (2007).
76. Hou, Y. et al. Effect of feeding regimen on meat quality, MyHC
isoforms, AMPK, and PGC-1 α genes expression in the biceps
femoris muscle of Mongolia sheep. Food Sci. Nutr. 8, 2262–2270
https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.1494 (2020).
77. Zhang, J. Effects of Dietary Succinate on Meat Quality and Muscle
Fiber Types of Tan Sheep (Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 2023).
https://doi.org/10.27257/d.cnki.gnxhc.2023.001186
78. Wang, Z. et al. Effects of energy restriction and compensation
ongrowth performance, and related hormonesand meat quality of
Hu sheep. J. Nanjing Agric. Univ. 41, 722–729 (2018).
79. Sun, X. Y. Effects of Breeds and Nutrient Level on Myo ﬁber Types
and Meat Quality in Pigs (Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu,
2009).
80. Hu, Y. C. et al. Effects of fermented wheat bran polysaccharides on
meat quality, muscle amino acid composition and expression of
antioxidant enzymes and muscle ﬁber type-related genes in muscle
of mutton sheep. Chin. J. Anim. Nutr. 32, 932–940 (2020).
81. Long, Y. et al. Effects of dietary allicin supplementation on meat
quality, antioxidant enzymes, ﬁber characteristics, and ﬂavor
composition of Guizhou black goats. Meat Sci. 231, 109962 https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2025.109962 (2026).
82. Chen, L., Liu, J. & Wang, Y. Effect of Chinese herbal medicine on
mutton quality and aroma compounds of F1 lambs of Du & Hu
hybridization. J. Anim. Sci. Vet. Med. 38,2 6–29 (2019).
83. Girard, M. et al. Forage legumes rich in condensed tannins may
increase n-3 fatty acid levels and sensory quality of lamb meat. J.
Sci. Food Agric 96, 1923–1933 https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.7298
(2016).
84. Prates, J. A. M. Impact of heat stress on carcass traits, meat quality,
and nutritional value in monogastric animals: underlying
mechanisms and nutritional mitigation strategies. Foods 14, 1612
(2025).
85. Chen, H. C. et al. Effects of different treatments of transportation
stress on energy metabolism of lambs muscle after slaughter. Acta
Veterinaria et. Zootechnica Sin. 54, 5101–5111 (2023).
86. Jassim, S. A. et al. Impact of transportation stress on meat quality in
sheep. J. Anim. Health Prod. 13, 372–380 (2025).
87. Gagaoua, M. et al. Intrinsic and extrinsic factors impacting fresh goat
meat quality: an overview. Meat Technol. 64,2 0–40 https://doi.org/
10.18485/meattech.2023.64.1.3 (2023).
88. Luo, Y. L. et al. Effects of α-lipoic acid on muscle ﬁber type
composition and meat qualityof tan sheep and underlying regulatory
mechanism. Trans. Chin. Soc. Agric. Eng. 38, 333–341 (2022).
89. Wang, J. X. et al. Effect of lairage time on stress level and meat quality
of Small Tail Han sheep. Trans. Chin. Soc. Agric. Machinery 50,
339–345 (2019).
90. Bai, Y. et al. Co-regulation of very fast chilling treatment and the
follow-up storage temperature on meat tenderness through
glycolysis. Foods 14, 2932 (2025).
91. Ma, M., Ma, J. R., Gao, S., Liang, Y. Q. & Luo, R. M. Effect of caspase-
3 inhibitor on water retention and tenderness of Tan Sheep meat
during postmortem aging. Food Sci. 46,9 6–105 (2025).
92. Yu, H., Ma, X. L., Liu, Y. F. & Zhang, R. Effects of maturation after
slaughter on physicochemical propertiesand proteins expression of
goats meat. Sci. Technol. Food Ind. 42,2 4–30 https://doi.org/10.
13386/j.issn1002-0306.2021040045 (2021).
93. Bentzinger, C. F. et al. Skeletal muscle-speci ﬁc ablation of raptor,
but not of rictor, causes metabolic changes and results in muscle
dystrophy. Cell Metab. 8, 411– 424 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmet.
2008.10.002 (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
94. Lin, J. et al. Transcriptional co-activator PGC-1 alpha drives the
formation of slow-twitch muscleﬁbres. Nature 418, 797–801 https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature00904 (2002).
95. Handschin, C. et al. Skeletal muscle ﬁber-type switching, exercise
intolerance, and myopathy in pgc-1 α muscle-speciﬁc knock-out
animals. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 30014–30021 https://doi.org/10.1074/
jbc.M704817200 (2007).
96. Krämer, D. K. et al. Human skeletal muscle ﬁbre type variations
correlate with PPAR alpha, PPAR delta and PGC-1 alpha mRNA.
Acta Physiol. 188, 207– 216 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-1716.
2006.01620.x (2006).
97. Quiat, D. et al. Concerted regulation of myo ﬁber-speciﬁc gene
expression and muscle performance by the transcriptional repressor
Sox6. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 10196–10201 https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1107413108 (2011).
98. Sadaki, S. et al. Large Maf transcription factor family is a major
regulator of fast type IIb myo ﬁber determination. Cell Rep. 42,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112289 (2023).
99. Jiang, B. et al. IRX5 promotes adipogenesis of hMSCs by repressing
glycolysis. Cell Death Discov. 8, 204 https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41420-022-00986-7 (2022).
100. Zhou, Y. et al. Lactate-induced metabolic remodeling and myo ﬁber
type transitions via activation of the Ca2 +-NFATC1 signaling
pathway. J. Cell Physiol. 239, e31290 (2024).
101. Gu, H. et al. Targeted overexpression of PPAR γ in skeletal muscle by
random insertion and CRISPR/Cas9 transgenic pig cloning
enhances oxidative ﬁber formation and intramuscular fat deposition.
FASEB J. 35, https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202001812rr (2021).
102. Cohen, T. J. et al. HDAC4 regulates muscle ﬁber type-speciﬁc gene
expression programs. Mol. Cells 38, 343–348 https://doi.org/10.
14348/molcells.2015.2278 (2015).
103. Penniman, C. et al. Loss of FoxOs in muscle increases strength and
mitochondrial function during aging.J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle
Open Access 14, 243–259 https://doi.org/10.1002/jcsm.13124
(2023).
104. Silveira, W. et al. cAMP-dependent protein kinase inhibits FoxO
activity and regulates skeletal muscle plasticity in mice.FASEB J.34,
https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.201902102rr (2020).
105. Qin, Y. Y. et al. A pan-cancer analysis of the MAPK family gene and
their association with prognosis, tumor microenvironment, and
therapeutic targets. Medicine 102, e35829 https://doi.org/10.1097/
md.0000000000035829 (2023).
106. Huang, B., Zhang, Z. & Pang, W. Progress and prospects of the
effects and mechanisms of myokines in regulating ﬁber type
transition of skeletal muscle. Chin. J. Biotechnol. 40, 4365–4381
https://doi.org/10.13345/j.cjb.240729 (2024).
107. Poklukar, K. et al. Effect of castration method on porcine skeletal
muscle ﬁber traits and transcriptome pro ﬁles. Vet. Anim. Sci. 25,
100383 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vas.2024.100383 (2024).
108. Marti, S., Realini, C. E., Bach, A., Pérez-Juan, M. & Devant, M. Effect
of castration and slaughter age on performance, carcass, and meat
quality traits of Holstein calves fed a high-concentrate diet. J. Anim.
Sci. 91, 1129–1140 https://doi.org/10.2527/jas.2012-5717 (2013).
109. Li, J. et al. Integrated lipidomics and targeted metabolomics
analyses reveal changes in ﬂavor precursors in psoas major muscle
of castrated lambs. Food Chem. 333, 127451 https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.foodchem.2020.127451 (2020).
110. Sun, B. et al. Effects of different feeding patterns on muscle ﬁber
typecomposition and mutton quality of sunit sheep. Sci. Technol.
Food Ind. 43,9 6–103 https://doi.org/10.13386/j.issn1002-0306.
2021090100 (2022).
111. Ding, W. et al. Meat of sheep: Insights into mutton evaluation,
nutritive value, inﬂuential factors, and interventions. Agriculture 14,
1060 (2024).
112. Zhang, S. et al. Effect of heat stress on growth performance, carcase
characteristics, meat quality and rumen-muscle axis of Hu sheep.
Ital. J. Anim. Sci. 23,8 7–100 https://doi.org/10.1080/1828051X.
2023.2284886 (2024).
113. Wang, C. et al. Lactobacillus improves meat quality in Sunit sheep by
affecting mitochondrial biogenesis through the AMPK pathway.
Front Nutr. 9, 1030485 https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.1030485
(2022).
114. Sun, L. et al. Dietary L-arginine supplementation in ﬂuences the
muscle ﬁber characteristics and meat quality of Mongolian sheep
through the NO/AMPK/PGC-1α pathway. Food Biosci. 52, 102446
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fbio.2023.102446 (2023).
115. Song, P. et al. Vitamin A regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and
function through p38 MAPK-PGC-1 α signaling pathway and alters
the muscle ﬁber composition of sheep. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 15,
18 https://doi.org/10.1186/s40104-023-00968-4 (2024).
116. Liu, Y. F. et al. Transcriptome sequencing analysis of the role of miR-
499-5p and SOX6 in chicken skeletal myo ﬁber speciﬁcation. Front.
Genet. 13, 2022 https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.1008649
(2022).
117. Luo, J. et al. The role of cis-regulatory elements in the determination
andtransformation of muscle ﬁber type in animal skeletal muscles.
Hereditas 47, 437–447 https://doi.org/10.16288/j.yczz.24-239
(2025).
118. Zhong, Z. et al. Evaluation of the genetic diversity, population
structure and selection signatures of three native chinese pig
populations. Animals 13, 2010 (2023).
119. Xu, S. W., Xing, T., Li, J. L., Zhang, L. & Gao, F. Effects of dietary
taurine supplementation on meat quality, glycolyticpotential and
muscle ﬁber characteristics in broiler chickens. J. Nanjing Agric.
Univ. 43, 935–941 (2020).
120. Zhang, P. et al. Research progress on the formation and
transformation mechanisms of muscle ﬁbers and their in ﬂuencing
factors-key determinants of livestock meat quality. Anim. Husb.
Feed Sci. 46,8 4–90 (2025).
121. Qi, Y. et al. Mutations in the foxo3 gene and their effects on meat
traits in gannan yaks. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 25, 1948 (2024).
122. Zhang, B. L., Liu, N., Hao, M. L. & Xie, Y. X. Research progress on
transport stress affected post-slaughter muscle energy metabolism
and meat quality of broilers. Chin. J. Anim. Nutr. 33, 3010–3018
(2021).
123. Anvarimanshadi, A. et al. Exercise reversing aging process and
inducing longevity by foxo proteins family. N. Approaches Exerc.
Physiol. 6, 151–180 https://doi.org/10.22054/nass.2025.85287.
1174 (2024).
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the Funds for Supporting Hubei
Academy of Agricultural Sciences Youth Research Fund (2025NKYJJ24),
the High-Quality Development of Seed and Breeding Industry Projects in
Hubei Province (HBZY2023B008), the JD Technology Research and
Development Project of Hubei Province (2023BAA029), 2025 Rural Revita-
lization Project (2025EBA004, 2025EBA026), and the Open Project of the
Key Laboratory of Nutritional Quality and Safety of Agricultural Products,
Hubei Academy of Agricultural Sciences (2025NQSAP-01).
Author contributions
M.C.: Writing – review & editing. X.Z.: Writing – original draft and prepared
ﬁgures. N.Z.: Resources. A.S.G.: Conceptualization and Supervision. F.J.:
Conceptualization. X.S.: Methodology. J.C.: Supervision. Q.X.: Funding
acquisition, Project administration and Writing– original draft.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press
Additional information
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Qi Xiong.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modi ﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2026
This Article in Press is shared early to give you faster access to new research.
It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. Theﬁnal edited version will replace it
automatically.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41538-026-01164-0 Review
npj Science of Food Article in Press