Effect of refractive correction of myopia on health-related quality of life among children aged 3–12 years: a prospective observational cohort study | BMC Pediatrics | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Pediatrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Effect of refractive correction of myopia on health-related quality of life among children aged 3–12 years: a prospective observational cohort study 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 19 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Pediatrics 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Effect of refractive correction of myopia on health-related quality of life among children aged 3–12 years: a prospective observational cohort study
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Yang Wang 1 , Lianhong Pi 1 , Lijuan Ouyang 1 , Si Chen 1 , Keyu Chen 1 & … Haibo Xiong 1   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 28 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Purpose To analyze refractive changes and health-related quality of life (QOL) in children with myopia aged 3–12 years and to explore the effects of refractive correction on the QOL of children in different age groups and their parents. Methods A 1-year prospective cohort study was conducted with 116 children aged 3–6 years and 98 children aged 7–12 years. Refractive tests are performed in 2022,and all children were prescribed with full correction single-vision spectacles.The Children’s Quality of Life Scale (PedsQL4) and Family Impact Scale (PedsQL2) were administered to the children and their parents, respectively. Furthermore, the above tests were repeated one year later. Results The annual increase in myopia among children aged 3–6 years and 7–12 years was − 0.58 ± 0.67D/year and − 0.99 ± 0.57D/year, respectively.The difference between the two age groups was statistically significant ( P <0.001).Multiple linear regression analysis revealed that age group, degree of childhood myopia, and outdoor activity time are independent influencing factors for the annual variation in SE.After wearing full correction single-vision spectacles for one year), the PedsQL total score of the children aged 7–12 years significantly improved (86.63; IQR (interquartile range, IQR): 78.22–91.78 vs. 78.56; IQR: 73.53–84.06, P  = 0.001). Moreover, the median total parental survey score in the 3-6-year-old and–7-12-year-old groups was significantly higher ([75.11; IQR: 71.73–82.86 vs. 82.15; IQR: 75.90-89.36, P  = 0.007]; [73.87; IQR: 67.45–80.05 vs. 80.20; IQR: 73.60-83.07, P  = 0.011]), and the difference was statistically significant. Conclusion The severity of myopia increased more rapidly in school-aged children than in pre-school children. After refractive correction, the QOL of children and their parents tended to improve, especially among school-aged children. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Effect of uncorrection versus full correction on myopia progression in 12-year-old children
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 29 October 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Factors associated with myopia in the Portuguese child population: An epidemiological study
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 28 November 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prevalence of myopia and associated risk factors among primary students in Chongqing: multilevel modeling
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 15 April 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Pupil disorders 
 
 
 
 Refractive errors 
 
 
 
 Vision disorders 
 
 
 
 Pediatrics 
 
 
 
 Quality of Life Research 
 
 
 
 Paediatric research 
 
 
 
 Myopia Epidemiology and Management Techniques 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding NA. Author information Authors and Affiliations Department of Ophthalmology, Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, National Clinical Research Center for Children and Adolescents’ Health and Diseases, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Structural Birth Defect and Reconstruction, 136 Zhongshan Rd, Yuzhong, Chongqing, 40014, China Yang Wang, Lianhong Pi, Lijuan Ouyang, Si Chen, Keyu Chen & Haibo Xiong Authors Yang Wang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lianhong Pi View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Lijuan Ouyang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Si Chen View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Keyu Chen View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Haibo Xiong View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Haibo Xiong . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Wang, Y., Pi, L., Ouyang, L. et al. Effect of refractive correction of myopia on health-related quality of life among children aged 3–12 years: a prospective observational cohort study.
 BMC Pediatr (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-026-07733-2 Download citation Received : 23 December 2024 Accepted : 14 September 2026 Published : 19 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-026-07733-2 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Myopia Children School age Preschool age Health-related quality of life 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Associated Content 
 
 
 
 Part of a collection: 
 
 
 Vision care and disorders in children 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature