ABSTRACT: Since ancient times, people have utilized phytomedicine to treat a massive illnesses. Medicinal plant-based therapeutic compounds have been widely available in nature. These plants include bioactive chemicals that have shown great pharmacological promise for a variety of medicinal uses, including cancer treatment, cardiovascular, including neuroprotective benefits, wound healing, antibacterial activity, and anti-inflammatory effects. But there are a number of problems with herbal remedies, including instability, low water absorption, and lipid solubility, which result in reduced bioavailability along with inadequate therapeutic effectiveness. This study's main goal is to investigate the problems with conventional herbal formulations and assess how nanotechnology-based drug delivery techniques. It examines how nanoformulations might boost the delivery of phytochemicals to improve therapy results for chronic illnesses, with a specific focus on cancer. A review of several nano-based systems for drug delivery, including their ability to boost therapeutic efficacy are also discussed, along with common techniques for producing nanocarriers used in herbal medication administration. For this study, researchers identified 435 records from various sources, including Scopus, PubMed, and other additional resources. After reviewing all the records, most of them did not meet the necessary criteria, so these records were excluded. Subsequently, 81 records that met the requirements were identified and used for this study. In the creation of sophisticated systems for drug delivery, nano-based methods for delivering phytochemicals or extracts from medicinal plants have shown potential. Organic nanoformulations are being explored to heal a range of ailments, including cancer. These drugs may result in anatomical defects, quickly dividing healthy tissues, treatment resistance in cancer cells, long-term adverse effects, and mental disturbances. Nanoparticles are valuable owing to their tiny size and particular properties. According to a study, encapsulating therapeutic chemicals they improve solubility, drug release, cellular absorption, and distribution. Recent research has demonstrated that nanotechnology-rooted medication delivery methods are sufficient to overcome the aforementioned restrictions.