Anthropogenic eutrophication of shallow lakes: Is it occasional? 
 
 
 <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.cf390c6bfbe7555f.css"> 
 
 Skip to main content
 Communities & Collections All of oURspace Statistics English Français Log In Log in New user? Click here to register. Have you forgotten your password? Log in with ORCID
 Home Research, Scholarship, and Creative Works Journal Articles and Conference Papers Anthropogenic eutrophication of shallow lakes: Is it occasional? Anthropogenic eutrophication of shallow lakes: Is it occasional? Loading... Files Zhou et al WR accepted version.pdf (1,023.91 KB) Date 2022-08-01 Authors Zhou, Jian Leavitt, Peter R Zhang, Yibo Qin, Boqiang Journal Title Journal ISSN Volume Title Publisher Elsevier Abstract Understanding and managing the susceptibility of lakes to anthropogenic eutrophication has been a primary goal of limnological research for decades. To achieve United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals, scientists have attempted to understand why shallow lakes appear to be prone to eutrophication and resistant to restoration. A rich data base of 1151 lakes (each ≥ 0.5 km2 located within the Europe and the United States of America offers a rare opportunity to explore potential answers. Analysis of sites showed that lake depth integrated socio-ecological systems and reflected potential susceptibility to anthropogenic stressors, as well as lake productivity. In this study, lakes distributed in agricultural plain and densely populated lowland areas were generally shallow and subjected to intense human activities with high external nutrient inputs. In contrast, deep lakes frequently occurred in upland regions, dominated by natural landscapes with little anthropogenic nutrient input. Lake depth appeared to not only reflect external nutrient load to the lake, but also acted as an amplifier that increased shallow lake susceptibility to anthropogenic disturbance. Our findings suggest that shallow lakes are more susceptible to human forcing and their eutrophication may be not an occasional occurrence, and that societal expectations, policy goals, and management plans should reflect this observation. 
 Description This is a final peer-reviewed accepted manuscript. The final published version is available
online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2022.118728
© 2022 Elsevier. This manuscript version is made available under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND) 4.0 International License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) Keywords Shallow lake , Eutrophication , Sustainability , Depth , Trophic state , Management Citation URI https://hdl.handle.net/10294/15918 Collections Journal Articles and Conference Papers Endorsement Review Supplemented By Referenced By Creative Commons license Except where otherwise noted, this item's license is described as Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International Full item page DSpace software copyright © 2002-2026 LYRASIS Cookie Settings Privacy Policy End User Agreement Send Feedback About oURspace Powered by