This dissertation establishes an integrated framework that leverages artificial intelligence (AI) and advanced metabolomics to overcome the "complexity bottleneck" in microbial engineering, specifically addressing the global crises of plastic waste and carbon emissions. By framing the research within the complex biosystems for effective bioproduction and bioremediation, this work develops novel strategies to engineer and analyze biological systems for a circular bioeconomy. In the "Build" phase (Chapter 2), the study addresses the instability of synthetic microbial consortia. By utilizing calcium-alginate hydrogel compartmentalization, the research successfully decouples the growth of the phototroph Synechococcus elongatus from its heterotrophic partners (P. putida and Y. lipolytica). This spatial separation protects heterotrophs from oxidative stress (ROS) and enables the stable production of high-value pigments, achieving titers up to 22 times higher than traditional free-cell co-cultures. The hydrogel compartmentalization also effectively simplifies the product recovery and extraction process. Meanwhile, spatially separated co-culturing enables metabolomic analysis for individual species for their biochemical response to different culture conditions. The "Design" and "Learn" phases (Chapter 3) introduce the MAP (Multimodal AI for Photobiorefinery) framework to solve the "cold start" problem for the fast-growing cyanobacterium S. elongatus UTEX 2973. This multimodal approach integrates GPT-4 assisted knowledge mining and Transfer Learning (TL) from well-studied model organisms. The TL models achieved high predictive accuracy (R² > 0.93) for growth and product titer, even under stringent testing conditions. The framework further links these predictions to Techno-Economic Analysis (TEA) to evaluate commercial feasibility, identifying optimal conditions for products like lycopene. Finally, the "Test" and "Analyze" phases (Chapter 4) apply an AI-empowered metabolomics toolkit to deconvolve the complex natural microbiome of the yellow mealworm (Tenebrio molitor) during plastic degradation. To deconvolve the complex metabolic "black box" of the mealworm gut, we developed a high-resolution, in vivo spatial metabolomics workflow. This methodology employed a spatial compartmentalized protocol, either isolating the foregut, midgut, and hindgut, or separately collecting gut content, worm body, and biowaste, combined with flash-frozen quenching to preserve transient metabolic intermediates. The resulting complex datasets were processed using the MSOne AI-software suite, which utilizes Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) for peak classification and a U-Net-based CNN for peak segmentation for automated spectral denoising and peak isolation. By integrating MSOne with SIRIUS 4 for de novo molecular formula annotation, we achieved a ten-fold improvement in compound identification compared to traditional manual curation, identifying over 200 metabolites and recov