Abstract. Long-range transport of trace elements (TEs) by aerosols plays a critical role in modulating marine biogeochemistry; however, their source contributions and spatial variability across land-sea gradients remain poorly constrained. Here, we conducted a refined source apportionment of TEs (e.g., Fe, Mn, Cr, V, Ni, Cu, Zn, As, Pb and Cd) in PM2.5 collected in the coastal city of Qingdao (eastern China) and adjacent marine regions (the Bohai Sea and Yellow Sea) during spring and summer 2018, to quantitatively resolve terrestrial vs. marine source contributions and identify the key processes controlling their spatial patterns. In spring, all TEs exhibited higher concentrations in Qingdao than in marine atmosphere. In contrast, in summer, Zn, Pb, As, and Cd became more enriched over the marine areas than in Qingdao, with coal combustion accounting for 52.5 %–78.8 % of their concentrations, indicating enhanced anthropogenic impact on the marine atmosphere. For traditional crustal TEs (Fe, Mn and Cr), terrestrial dust dominated in spring Qingdao (e.g., Fe: 81.6 %, 2832.0 ng m−3), where the pure dust contributions declined sharply in spring marine areas (Fe: 25.4 %, 145.2 ng m−3). However, part of the dust likely underwent aging during transport and was incorporated into the aged marine aerosol factor, which contributed 33.6 % of Fe, indicating that dust-related influence remained important offshore and that spring marine aerosols experienced substantial mixing among transported dust, marine processing and anthropogenic emissions. In contrast, coal combustion became the dominant source in summer marine aerosols (Fe: 43.2 %, 82.8 ng m−3), exceeding its contribution in Qingdao (Fe: 14.1 %, 45.5 ng m−3). Residual oil combustion was identified as the primary source of marine Ni and V (V: 65.7 % in spring and 79.8 % in summer) and also made substantial contributions to Fe, Mn, and Cr, particularly in summer marine aerosols (e.g., Fe: 26.1 %, 50.0 ng m−3). Overall, the refined source apportionment demonstrates that anthropogenic emissions, especially coal combustion and shipping-related residual oil combustion, play a dominant role in shaping the TE composition of marine aerosols over the Bohai and Yellow Seas, while transported dust and its atmospheric aging remain important for crustal elements. These results advance our understanding of land-sea interactions in atmospheric TE cycling and provide new constraints for regional air quality and climate models.