Sulfur and polymer coating on urea enhances antioxidant defense, nutrient balance, secondary metabolites, and nitrogen use efficiency in salt‑stressed wheat | BMC Plant Biology | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sulfur and polymer coating on urea enhances antioxidant defense, nutrient balance, secondary metabolites, and nitrogen use efficiency in salt‑stressed wheat 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 03 October 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC Plant Biology 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sulfur and polymer coating on urea enhances antioxidant defense, nutrient balance, secondary metabolites, and nitrogen use efficiency in salt‑stressed wheat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Muhammad Talha Aslam  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0009-0000-0630-1961 1 , Imran Khan 1 , Muhammad Umer Chattha 1 , Saira Ghafoor 2 , Ahmed Mahmoud Ismail 3 , Maha Alsunbul 4 , Muhammad Habib Ur-Rahman 5 , Ayman El Sabagh 6 , Ibrahim Al-Ashkar 7 & … Marian Brestic 8 , 9   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 35 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Soil salinity is a growing threat to wheat productivity. This study evaluated whether different coated urea formulations– especially polymer-sulfur-coated urea (PSCU) – could help wheat cope with different salt stress levels: non-saline control (1.3 dS m − 1 , showing the natural background salinity of the tested soil), moderate (6 dS m − 1 ), and high (12 dS m − 1 ), and four nitrogen treatments: normal urea, polymer-coated urea, polymer-zinc-coated urea, and PSCU were given (287.50 mg N/pot) in three equal splits at sowing, 25, and 50 days after sowing. High salinity alone decreased grain yield and crop biomass approximately by 35% and 23%, respectively, while shoot dry weight decreased by more than half. Salinity also increased Na⁺ uptake, electrolyte leakage, and reactive oxygen species that reduced photosynthetic pigments, RWC, and K⁺ uptake. All coated urea performed better compared to normal urea; however, PSCU was most promising. PSCU decreased oxidative damage, enhanced NPK uptake, and preserved maximum leaf water status and chlorophyll. Using PSCU, secondary metabolites (i.e., flavonoids, total phenols, and tocopherol) were enhanced by several‑fold in severe salt stress. Furthermore, indices of nitrogen use efficiency (NUE) (i.e., partial factor productivity, nitrogen balance intensity, and uptake efficiency etc.) also maximized under PSCU application. While PSCU could not fully restore control-level wheat performance in high salinity, it consistently alleviated salinity damage better than the other coatings. The present study suggests that applying polymer-sulfur-coated urea could be a promising strategy to improve wheat resilience and nitrogen efficiency in salt-affected soils. Graphical abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Coated Urea Improves Productivity and Nitrogen Use Efficiency in Wheat
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 08 January 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Slow-release nitrogen fertilizers enhance growth, yield, NUE in wheat crop and reduce nitrogen losses under an arid environment
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 09 April 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Neem and Castor Oil–Coated Urea Mitigates Salinity Effects in Wheat by Improving Physiological Responses and Plant Homeostasis
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 30 May 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Coating 
 
 
 
 Salt 
 
 
 
 Soil and Water Protection 
 
 
 
 Agriculture 
 
 
 
 Coatings 
 
 
 
 Plant Biochemistry 
 
 
 
 Nitrogen Metabolism and Stress Responses in Leguminous and Non-Leguminous Plants 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements This work was supported by the project VEGA 1/0048/25, ‘New approaches for screening tolerant genotypes for environmental stresses and efficient measures for improving phenotypic and production properties’. This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientific Research, Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal University, Saudi Arabia through Grant No. KFU263771. The research was supported by the Ongoing Research Funding program, ORF 2026-298, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The authors extended their appreciation to Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Project number (PNURSP2026R736), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 
 Declarations of generative AI technology 
 An open access AI-tool (DeepSeek) was used to remove the grammar mistakes and to improve the readability of this manuscript. AI-tool was used to generate the graphical abstract. Later, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content where necessary and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 
 Funding This work was supported by the project VEGA 1/0048/25, ‘New approaches for screening tolerant genotypes for environmental stresses and efficient measures for improving phenotypic and production properties.’ This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientific Research, Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal University, Saudi Arabia through Grant No. KFU263771. This publication was supported by the Ongoing Research Funding program ORF-2026-298, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The research was funded by Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Project number (PNURSP2026R736), Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Author information Authors and Affiliations Department of Agronomy, University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Faisalabad, 38040, Pakistan Muhammad Talha Aslam, Imran Khan & Muhammad Umer Chattha Key Laboratory of Crop Physiology, Ecology, and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of Education/College of Agronomy, Economic and Technical Development Zone, Jiangxi Agricultural University, 1101 Fang Zhimin Avenue, Nanchang, 330045, China Saira Ghafoor Pests and Plant Diseases Unit, College of Agricultural and Food Sciences, King Faisal University, Al-Ahsa, 31982, Saudi Arabia Ahmed Mahmoud Ismail Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh, 11671, Saudi Arabia Maha Alsunbul Department of Crop Sciences, Tropical Plant Production and Agricultural Systems Modelling (TROPAGS), Georg-August-University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany Muhammad Habib Ur-Rahman Department of Field Crops, Faculty of Agriculture, Siirt University, Siirt, Turkey Ayman El Sabagh Plant Production Department, College of Food and Agriculture Sciences, King Saud University, P.O. Box 2460, Riyadh, 11451, Saudi Arabia Ibrahim Al-Ashkar College of Life Science, State Key Laboratory of Crop Biology, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, 271018, China Marian Brestic Institute of Plant and Environmental Science, Faculty of Agrobiology and Food Resources, Slovak University of Agriculture in Nitra, Nitra, Slovak Republic Marian Brestic Authors Muhammad Talha Aslam View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Imran Khan View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Muhammad Umer Chattha View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Saira Ghafoor View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ahmed Mahmoud Ismail View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Maha Alsunbul View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Muhammad Habib Ur-Rahman View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ayman El Sabagh View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ibrahim Al-Ashkar View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Marian Brestic View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Imran Khan , Ahmed Mahmoud Ismail or Marian Brestic . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary Information Supplementary Material 1. (download DOCX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Aslam, M.T., Khan, I., Chattha, M.U. et al. Sulfur and polymer coating on urea enhances antioxidant defense, nutrient balance, secondary metabolites, and nitrogen use efficiency in salt‑stressed wheat.
 BMC Plant Biol (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09928-2 Download citation Received : 18 May 2026 Accepted : 04 September 2026 Published : 03 October 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s12870-026-09928-2 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Antioxidants Nutrient uptake Nitrogen use efficiency Salinity tolerance Secondary metabolites Wheat 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Muhammad Talha Aslam 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 Imran Khan 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ahmed Mahmoud Ismail 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 Marian Brestic 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature