: Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are widely used in a variety of advanced industrial fields because of their high modulus and strength, in addition to other desirable properties at high temperatures, such as wear resistance and corrosion properties. These properties encourage the material to be used in a variety of applications. MMCs possess these qualities, which is why this is the case. For the past few decades, the method of additive manufacturing (AM) has been the focus of interest as one of the prospective technologies that can be applied to construct MMCs. This attention has been directed toward the manufacturing approach. The field of additive manufacturing (AM) for metal-metal composites (MMCs) is the subject of this article, which examines the current advancements and activities that have taken place in this field. The various additive manufacturing (AM) technologies that are currently available, the various types of reinforcement, the preparation of feedstock, the fundamentals of synthesis in the AM process, typical AM-produced MMCs, the strengthening mechanisms of MMCs, the challenges that are required to fabricate MMCs, and potential interests in the field are all highlighted in this article. The AM method of manufacturing MMCs displayed mechanical properties that were equivalent to or even superior to those of the conventionally manufactured ones. This was proved when compared to the MMCs that were created using the regular MMC production procedure. This occurred as a result of the reinforcement being distributed uniformly throughout the material and the tiny microstructure. In addition, the technology of additive manufacturing can be applied to construct MMC lattice structures and geometrically complex components of MMC items. Additionally, it can be utilized to generate bulk MMCs with a substantially lower porosity. According to what was stated earlier, it has been noted that a significant number of AM-fabricated MMCs have been made. These MMCs include titanium matrix composites, aluminum matrix composites, nickel matrix composites, and iron matrix composites, amongst others. Both the technology and the parameters of additive manufacturing (AM) are highly dependent on the types and contents of reinforcements that are chosen. This, in turn, has an impact on the qualities of the MMCs that are produced by AM. Orowan strengthening, load transfer strengthening, dislocation strengthening, and Hall–Petch strengthening are all examples of different sorts of strengthening processes that have been identified in such MMCs. These four separate pathways have been identified as strengthening mechanisms. There are, however, a number of drawbacks that exist between the AM technologies and the regular manufacturing techniques, and these drawbacks can be solved for the properties of MMCs. Nevertheless, there are a lot of opportunities for improvement. Despite this, there are still more challenges to overcome: concerns about AMproduced MMCs, includin