ABSTRACT Seamounts are generally recognized as hotspots of microbial biodiversity in the ocean, and their topography and hydrography around the seamounts significantly influence microbial biogeography. Nevertheless, the biodiversity and assembly mechanisms of microbial communities in seamount regions remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigated the diversity, composition, structure, and assembly mechanism of both large-fraction (LF; 1.6–200 μm) and small-fraction (SF; 0.2–1.6 μm) bacterial and protistan communities within the deep chlorophyll maximum (DCM) layer of the Xianbei seamount and adjacent coastal waters in the South China Sea, using 16S and 18S rDNA high-throughput sequencing. The results showed that the seamount served as a hotspot for the diversity of LF bacteria and protists in the DCM layer, which was associated with chlorophyll a (Chl- a ) fluorescence in the seamount region. Microbial community composition differed between the seamount and coastal regions, with metabolically flexible heterotrophic bacteria (Pseudomonadales, Planctomycetales, and the BD2-11 terrestrial group) and broad-spectrum phagotrophic flagellates (Telonemia) being enriched in the seamount. Furthermore, co-occurrence networks in the seamount exhibited lower clustering and robustness than those in coastal waters. Model analyses revealed that stochastic processes exerted a more pronounced influence on the assembly of microbial communities. Our study revealed distinct features of microbial diversity and community structure between the seamount and adjacent coastal areas, highlighting the significance of stochastic processes in structuring microbial communities in the seamount. IMPORTANCE Seamounts represent potential hotspots of microbial diversity, characterized by a wide array of unique microbial communities. Nevertheless, our understanding of the microbiology of seamounts remains limited. In this study, we show that microbial diversity and community structure within the deep chlorophyll maximum in the Xianbei seamount differ distinctly from those in adjacent coastal waters. We suggest that these differences are likely associated with enhanced primary production and dynamic environmental heterogeneity driven by seamount topography. Furthermore, in comparison with previous studies, our findings reveal that microorganisms of varying sizes and lifestyles display different responses to seamount effects, with particularly pronounced responses among particle-associated bacteria and protists. The findings of this study advance our understanding of microbial diversity and assembly in seamounts and provide a valuable reference for further exploration of microbial biodiversity in this region.