Lab Animal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41684-026-01803-9
Commentlab animal
Current legislation and recommendations 
on ethical post-experimental care 
and disposition of laboratory animals: 
a call for global standards
Ji Min Lee, Sang Wha Kim & Seung Hyeok Seok
The fate of laboratory animals once experiments 
end remains an ethical blind spot. This 
Comment compares the legislation governing 
the post-experimental care and disposition of 
laboratory animals—rehoming, reuse, setting free 
and tissue sharing—across the European Union, 
USA, UK and Republic of Korea. Highlighting the 
gaps that persist, particularly in the Republic of 
Korea, it proposes a decision-making framework 
and calls on the global scientific community to 
adopt shared ethical standards for the animals 
that have contributed to research.
In 1959, William Russell and Rex Burch proposed the groundbreaking 
3Rs principle (Replacement, Reduction, Refinement) as a framework to 
address the pressing ethical and scientific issues surrounding experimental 
animal use in research1. Since the introduction of the 3Rs principle, ethi-
cal treatment of laboratory animals has become a paramount concern 
within the global scientific community, transcending disciplinary and 
geographic borders2. Ethical standards for modern experimental animals 
have primarily dealt with the period leading up to the conclusion of the 
experiments. However, this narrow perspective overlooks animals that 
can continue living after the completion of experiments, resulting in an 
ethical blind spot. Russell and Burch defined the unpleasant mental states 
experienced by animals as ‘inhumanity’ and explained various experi-
ences, such as fear, conflict and hunger, under the concept of ‘distress’1. 
Considering their definition of ‘inhumanity’ , the anxiety that animals 
will face after the experiment ends should also be considered under the 
concept of ‘responsibility’ , aligning with the 3Rs principle that aims to 
reduce the painful experiences of experimental animals.
Establishing ethical treatment standards for animals that survive 
the conclusion of experimentation or are not used in studies is a new 
emerging issue in experimental animal ethics. It is important to expand 
our social and ethical responsibilities beyond merely determining eutha-
nasia techniques or assuming death as an inevitable outcome1. We must 
consider how to responsibly manage the lives of these animals after the 
initial experimentation. For animals that survive, rehoming should be 
prioritized as a key ethical alternative to euthanasia. For animals that have 
already been euthanized, the potential for tissue deposition and sharing 
should be considered to maximize their contribution to advance scientific 
and ethical objectives. Finally, as part of the reduction principle aimed 
at minimizing the total number of laboratory animals used, the reuse of 
laboratory animals should also be carefully considered. Despite the exist-
ence of legal frameworks addressing post-experimental animal treatment, 
such as 9 CFR in the US Government3, the Animals (Scientific Procedures) 
Act 1986 in the UK4 and the DIRECTIVE 2010/63/EU in the European 
Union (EU)5, the widespread adoption and standardization of humane 
post-experimental practices, including rehoming, have yet to be widely 
adopted within the scientific community. The need for concerted efforts 
to establish global standards for ethical rehoming and reuse is paramount 
and is driven by our moral obligation as researchers to ensure the welfare 
of animals that have contributed to scientific advancement.
Here, we examined the global legal landscape of post-experimental 
animal care and disposition practices with a focus on reuse, rehoming and 
tissue-sharing initiatives, not focusing on particular taxa but rather on 
the sentient animals capable of experiencing pain and distress. We aimed 
to identify key considerations and challenges in implementing standard-
ized programs by comparing legal frameworks and practices across the 
EU, USA, UK and Republic of Korea (Korea). Through this comparison, 
we confirmed that, unlike the EU, USA and UK, Korea still has several 
legal gaps in its post-experimental animal care and disposition frame-
work. Accordingly, Korea was positioned as a representative example of 
countries where relevant legal systems remain underdeveloped, serving 
as a comparative case alongside the EU, USA and UK. Ultimately, this 
Comment calls for the scientific community to unite in establishing and 
adhering to standardized ethical practices for laboratory animal reuse, 
rehoming, tissue sharing and deposition. The aim is not only to enhance 
animal welfare and promote the reduction principle, but also to reinforce 
the integrity and ethical standards of scientific research worldwide.
Regulatory frameworks for the rehoming and reuse of 
laboratory animals
A comparative analysis of the legal regulations concerning the rehoming 
and reuse of laboratory animals in Korea, the USA, the UK and the EU 
revealed that all examined countries have established legal provisions 
regarding rehoming (Supplementary Table 1). However, the regulatory 
framework in Korea does not specify regulations for the reuse of laboratory 
animals (Supplementary Table 2). The Animal Protection Act in Korea 
stipulates that animals may be donated or sold after experiments, provided 
that their normal recovery is confirmed6. Research facilities in the USA are 
required to maintain records while transporting, selling or disposing of 
dogs or cats3,7. In the USA, the Animal Welfare Act covers warm-blooded 
animals such as dogs, cats, nonhuman primates, guinea pigs, hamsters and 
rabbits used for research, education, testing or exhibition, while excluding 
rats, mice and birds. Because recordkeeping requirements apply only to 
 Check for updates
Lab Animal
Commentlab animal
dogs and cats, rehoming practices are effectively limited to these species. 
Although the target species vary, including dogs, cats, nonhuman primates 
and ferrets, 16 states have implemented policies that prioritize the rehom-
ing of laboratory animals whenever possible. Various US institutions 
and organizations such as the National Institutes of Health, American 
Veterinary Medical Association and American College of Laboratory 
Animal Medicine8–10 have expanded the Code of Federal Regulations 
(9 CFR)3 to strengthen rehoming policies for research animal disposition. 
The Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 (ASPA) in the UK provides 
detailed regulations and guidelines for the release or rehoming of labora-
tory animals4,11,12. It mandates consideration of the health status of animals, 
potential risks to public health and the environment, socialization plans 
and measures to ensure animal welfare. The EU also permits the release 
or rehoming of laboratory animals, with considerations similar to the UK.
In addition, both the UK and the EU explicitly recognize the setting 
free of animals—their return to a suitable habitat or husbandry system 
appropriate to the species—as a further option for the post-experimental 
disposition of laboratory animals, a possibility that is particularly relevant 
to wild-caught individuals (Supplementary Table 1). Under Article 19 of 
DIRECTIVE 2010/63/EU5, setting free is permitted only when the state 
of health of the animal allows it, when there is no danger to public health, 
animal health or the environment, and when appropriate measures have 
been taken to safeguard the animal’s well-being. Similarly, the ASPA in the 
UK4 requires that, before a wild-caught animal is set free, consideration 
be given to its health status, the ecological and predation pressures it may 
encounter after release, the risk of disease transmission and the impact on 
the existing ecosystem, as well as to its socialization and the completion of 
an appropriate rehabilitation program. Although setting free applies to a 
narrower range of species and studies than rehoming or reuse, its explicit 
inclusion in legislation underscores that responsible post-experimental 
disposition should encompass the full spectrum of options, including a 
return to the wild where this can be achieved safely and humanely.
Regarding the reuse of laboratory animals after the experiments, the 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Research 
Council (USA)), while emphasizing the 3Rs principle, does not report or 
encourage the reuse of laboratory animals to reduce animal numbers13. 
By contrast, the EU not only sets stringent conditions for reuse but also 
requires institutions to report the number of reused animals, ensuring 
that such practices are closely monitored and transparently managed. 
Furthermore, through its Guidance on severity assessment, the EU provides 
specific criteria for evaluating the cumulative severity that animals may 
experience over their lifetime when considering reuse, thereby reinforcing 
a welfare-centered approach. Similarly, the UK stipulates that the reuse of 
animals is permitted only when authorized under project licenses, provided 
that a veterinarian confirms full recovery of the animal’s health and that the 
previous procedures were classified as nonrecovery, mild or moderate. In 
this context, the USA, UK and EU adopt a cautious approach to the reuse of 
laboratory animals. They all clearly stated that reuse is only possible under 
strict conditions that prioritize animal welfare and minimize suffering.
In contrast with these governing bodies, Korea lacks any legal provi-
sions to address this issue, highlighting the absence of guidelines that could 
provide regulatory or advisory support. In Korea, institutions are required to 
maintain records and documents related to the operation of the Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) for at least 3 years and report 
the status of animal experiments to the Ministry of Agriculture, Food, 
and Rural Affairs, including the number and source of laboratory animals 
used annually. However, while institutions are required to submit annual 
reports on the number of animals used—classified by procedure severity 
at the time of the IACUC’s proposal evaluation—and their source, there is 
no obligation to log in the veterinary record or report the fate of animals 
after the initial experiments, other than confirming their health status.
Key considerations for the rehoming and reuse of 
laboratory animals
The regulatory frameworks mentioned above address diverse key elements 
that should be considered for the rehoming and reuse of laboratory animals. 
By conceptualizing and summarizing these key elements, we compiled 
how different countries around the world handle the factors that must be 
considered in each decision (Supplementary Table 3).
Various institutions consider different criteria as important, such as 
suitability, suitable adopters, socialization, partnerships and public health 
(Supplementary Table 3). However, no single criterion is universally 
emphasized by all institutions, indicating differences among organizations. 
Specifically, institutions in the USA, such as the National Institutes of 
Health, American Veterinary Medical Association and American College 
of Laboratory Animal Medicine, emphasize compliance with relevant 
laws (federal, state and local laws) and the authority of the Attending 
Veterinarian (AV)8–10. The UK, EU and the Federation of European 
Laboratory Animal Science Associations strengthen the role of the Animal 
Welfare Body (or AWERB in UK) and consider welfare even after adoption, 
noting that both social environments (contact with humans and animals) 
and nonsocial environments (visual, auditory and olfactory stimuli) should 
be considered14. Notably, the Federation of European Laboratory Animal 
Science Associations recommendations on rehoming represent the first 
and only international standard in this area, going beyond existing regula-
tions, and emphasize that adoption programs should account for the total 
cost of animal welfare before and after rehoming14.
Based on the summary of key elements that should be considered for 
reuse (Supplementary Table 3), it is evident that organizations and gov-
ernments mention fewer considerations for reuse compared to rehoming. 
According to the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 of the UK4 and 
the DIRECTIVE 2010/63/EU of the EU5, animal reuse in new procedures 
is permitted only if four conditions are met: (1) severity of previous pro-
cedures, (2) veterinary confirmation, (3) health condition of the animal 
and (4) severity of further procedures. These regulations permit reuse only 
under stringent criteria to effectively manage and regulate the reuse of ani-
mals while limiting their prolonged suffering and ensuring adequate welfare.
Regulatory frameworks of deposition and sharing of 
laboratory animals’ organs and tissues
A comparison was made between the regulatory frameworks related to the 
deposition and sharing of organs and tissues of laboratory animals after 
the experiments in Korea, the UK and the EU (Supplementary Table 4). 
While the EU and UK provide detailed regulations on deposition, the US 
lacks clear regulations on tissue deposition, including those in the Guide 
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and cannot be compared 
with the other countries in this regard (Supplementary Table 4).
Article 5 of the Laboratory Animals Act of Korea15 stipulates the oper-
ation of a Laboratory Animal Resource Bank for the preservation and man-
agement of resources derived from laboratory animals. The ‘Enforcement 
Decree of the National Research and Development Innovation Act’ and 
the ‘ Act on the Acquisition, Management, and Utilization of Biological 
Research Resources’ mandate the deposit and preservation of biological 
research resources obtained through government-supported research, 
aiming for systematic resource management16. However, the implementa-
tion of these systems is not mandated for inclusion in the IACUC review 
or in animal experimental planning, resulting in a lack of practical regula-
tions or operational standards.
Lab Animal
Commentlab animal
The UK goes further by stipulating the establishment of programs for 
sharing organs and tissues from deceased animals for scientific purposes 
as a responsibility of the Secretary of State 4. In addition, as part of the 
government policy to reduce animal use, the sharing of research results, 
resources, animals and data is actively encouraged. The EU also requires 
each nation to facilitate the establishment of programs to share organs 
and tissues from deceased animals5. To this end, the UK operates various 
resource-sharing programs led by the NC3Rs, and the laws of the EU and 
UK explicitly require governments to support the establishment of 
organ- and tissue-sharing programs for euthanized animals11.
Global standards for ethical laboratory animal rehoming 
and reuse: a call for action
Regarding rehoming, reuse and deposition of laboratory animals, the legis-
lative framework of Korea was found to be lacking compared to the UK, 
USA and EU, which are considered to have advanced systems. To tackle this 
situation in Korea and improve experimental animal ethics, institutional 
improvements are necessary. Even though the Korean government has 
recently made various efforts through legal amendments to address these 
gaps, beyond regulatory improvement, fostering a culture of ethical respon-
sibility within the research community is equally essential. Researchers and 
institutions should take the lead in developing voluntary standards and 
best practices that go beyond legal requirements, reflecting a shared com-
mitment to the welfare of laboratory animals and the integrity of science.
Regarding rehoming, there is a need to raise awareness about the 
life and suffering experienced by surviving animals post-experiment and 
establish clear systems to help researchers and institutions realistically 
implement adoption, including for rodents and wild species like nonhuman 
primates. Guidelines should also be established to ensure animal welfare 
during the gap period between protocol approvals. In particular, when 
considering reuse as an option for surviving individuals, there should be 
strict evaluation criteria that comprehensively consider the possibility of 
animal survival, previous research history, current health status and veteri-
nary opinion. To efficiently manage deposition of euthanized individuals, 
Ye s
N o
Ye s
N o
Step 1
Did a n y animals sur viv e post-e x perime n t ation ?
Step 2
R eho ming
•S uit ability of the animal f or r ehoming
▪ Specie s
▪ He alth
▪ Medical tr e atment (neuter , v accine )
▪ Socializ ation
•S uit ability of adopter f or r ehoming
▪ Is w ell-inf ormed about the animal
▪ Deemed a r e sponsible individual f or r ehoming
▪ W ell-pr epar ed f or the w ell-being of the animal
•S uit ability of r ehoming intermediarie s
•Compliant with r ele v ant la ws
•No risk to public he alth
•R ehoming suit ability determined b y v eterinarian
•A CUC appr o v al f or r ehoming plan
K e y consider ations for re u se
•Se v erity of pr e vious pr ocedur e
•V eterinarian ’s advice on the animal’ s lif etime e xperience
•F ully r e stor ed st ate of animal’ s he alth
•Se v erity of fur ther pr ocedur e
K e y co nsid e ration s fo r reho ming
•Compliance
•A V ’s authority
•S uit ability
•Medication
•Inf ormation f or adopter
•S uit ability of adopter
•Socializ ation
•P ar tner ship
•Public he alth
•P ost-r ehoming w ell-being
IA CUC delib e ra tio n s
•F ull e xperiment al histor y 
•Curr ent v eterinar y he alth cer tificate
•V eterinarian ’s opinion on r ehoming
•Public he alth r ele v ance
IA CUC d eliberation s
•F ull e xperiment al histor y 
•T ot al accumulated pain
•Curr ent v eterinar y he alth cer tificate
•V eterinarian ’s opinion on r euse
•S uit ability of r euse pr otocol
Potential of additional suﬀering•
R eus e
•P ain gr ade is belo w Gr ade E (= se v er e ) f or the additional e xperiment 
•Animal is fully r eco v er ed fr om pr e vious e xperiment 
•Maximum of one pr e vious e xperiment with a pain gr ade e x ceeding 
Gr ade E 
•A ccumulated and tot al amount of pain that the animal is e xpected 
to e xperience is deemed r e asonable 
•S uit ability f or r euse determined b y v eterinarian 
•IA CUC appr o v al f or r euse plan
Depo sitio n
•Sharing or gans and tissue s
•Depositing or gans and tissue s
E uthan asia
Did the attending veterinarian determine that the animal would suﬀer?
Fig. 1 | Decision-tree proposal for the post-experimental animal care and 
disposal plan, with the IACUC as the final decision-making body. The 
flowchart guides researchers and the IACUC through the options available 
for animals remaining after a study. Surviving animals may be considered for 
rehoming, reuse or setting free, whereas the tissues and organs of euthanized 
animals may be deposited or shared. For each pathway, the final decision rests 
with the IACUC, based on the Attending Veterinarian (AV)’s assessment that 
the animal will not experience pain or distress, and on consideration of the 
animal’s health status, the severity of previous procedures and the relevant legal 
requirements.
Lab Animal
Commentlab animal
concrete regulations are required for the storage, sharing and disposal of 
animal tissues after experiments. In addition, an international network 
should be established to promote ethical considerations, data management 
and collaboration among researchers in the tissue deposition process.
The fate of animals after the experimentation should follow ethi -
cal and rational standards, necessitating the establishment of a globally 
applicable framework and subsequent discussions. As discussed in detail 
in the case of Korea, various countries have substantial differences in the 
specificity or existence of regulations related to animal welfare. Therefore, 
establishing consistent standards for animal treatment and creating inter-
national discussion forums are important starting points. When research-
ers use a decision-making framework to help them plan specifically and 
carefully for the fate of animals after animal experiments, they could 
consider animal numbers and post-experimental handling plans in their 
design from the experimental planning stage and make ethical choices.
This Comment aims to present a decision-making framework that 
includes all the key components of laws and guidelines from selected coun-
tries (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). As specifically explained in Fig. 1, 
living animals that remain after the experiment can be rehomed or reused. 
The final decision on whether the remaining animals may be rehomed 
or reused is made by the IACUC, based on the veterinarian’s assessment 
that the animals will not experience pain or distress. Throughout this 
process, researchers should be able to provide all relevant information and 
explanations, as requested by the IACUC, which is critical for ensuring 
transparency and accountability. Careful calculation of the number of 
offspring of the experimental animals (Supplementary Fig. 1) should be 
performed before following the proposed decision tree (Fig. 1). Certain 
countries commonly emphasize that researchers have an ethical obligation 
to establish responsible plans for the production and handling of animals 
to be used in experiments4,5,8. This includes breeding only the minimum 
number of animals necessary and achieving research objectives through 
optimal management of bred animals. During the IACUC approval pro-
cess, the management plan for experimental animals awaiting approval 
for rehoming or reuse should be clearly defined, and humane endpoints 
should be set to ensure that animals do not experience additional pain 
during this management period (Supplementary Table 5).
In conclusion, the comparison of laboratory animal-related regu-
lations from various countries revealed differences in animal welfare 
approaches and research ethics across those countries. To fulfill ethical 
responsibilities in animal experimentation, the systematic establishment 
of relevant laws and guidelines is essential in each country. The enact-
ment of animal welfare laws, advancement of researchers’ awareness and 
judgment, and systematization of the IACUC are not issues specific to any 
one country but need to be improved globally. When institutions in each 
country consider using forms such as those shown in Fig. 1, researchers 
can more easily establish ethical decision-making processes. Ultimately, by 
developing a global framework to ensure ethical animal experimentation 
and promote ethical awareness, a sustainable research environment that 
respects animal rights and welfare could be achieved.
Ji Min Lee 1, Sang Wha Kim2 & Seung Hyeok Seok 3,4,5 
1Research Ethics Team, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. 2College of Veterinary Medicine, Institute of Veterinary 
Science, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea. 
3Macrophage Lab, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Institute of Endemic Disease, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 4Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea. 5Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
 e-mail: sangwhakim@kangwon.ac.kr; lamseok@snu.ac.kr
Published online: xx xx xxxx
References
1. Russell, W. M. S. & Burch, R.L. The Principles of Humane Experimental Technique 
(Methuen&Co, 1959).
2. Kim, S. W. et al. Zebrafish 21, 53–66 (2024).
3. Code of Federal Regulations. US Government https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-9 
(accessed 18 September 2024).
4. Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986. UK Government https://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukpga/1986/14/contents (accessed 18 September 2024).
5. EUR-Lex. The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/eli/dir/2010/63/oj (accessed 18 September 2024).
6. (Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency of Korea, 2019).
7. Michigan State https://legislature.mi.gov/documents/2023-2024/billanalysis/Senate/pdf/ 
2023-SFA-0148-N.pdf (accessed 14 October 2024).
8. PHS Policy. NIH Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare https://olaw.nih.gov/policies-laws/
phs-policy.htm (accessed 18 September 2024).
9. Adoption of research and teaching animals. American Veterinary Medical Association 
https://www.avma.org/resources-tools/avma-policies/research-dogs-and-cats-adoption 
(accessed 18 September 2024).
10. Goodly, L. J. et al. J. Am. Assoc. Lab. Anim. Sci. 56, 807 (2017).
11. Guidance on the operation of the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 (ASPA) (2023). 
UK Government https://www.gov.uk/guidance/guidance-on-the-operation-of-the-animals- 
scientific-procedures-act-1986
12. LASA Guidance on the Rehoming of Laboratory Dogs. Laboratory Animal Science Association 
https://www.lasa.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/LASA-Guidance-on-the-Rehoming-of- 
Laboratory-Dogs.pdf (accessed 18 September 2024).
13. National Research Council. (National Academies Press, 2011).
14. Ecuer, E. et al. Lab. Anim. 57, 572–582 (2023).
15. Korean Government https://elaw.klri.re.kr/kor_service/lawView.do?hseq=61037&lang=KOR 
(accessed 18 September 2024).
16. Korean Government https://elaw.klri.re.kr/kor_service/lawView.do?hseq=49586&lang=KOR 
(accessed 18 September 2024).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by 
the Korea government (MSIT) (grant nos. RS-2024-00356146 and 2022R1C1C2010114).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41684-026-01803-9.
Peer review information Lab Animal thanks Thierry Decelle and Javier Guillen for their 
contribution to the peer review of this work.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, 
distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit 
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and 
indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence 
to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third 
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s 
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation 
or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.