Chapter 
Introductory Chapter: Water 
Quality – Emerging Concern for 
Sustainable FutureSvetislav 
S. Krstić1.
Water quality in human history and its contemporary stateWater 
quality has not been in focus for a very long period of human history on our 
planet. Most probably, there have been many occasions when humans have learned 
not to drink “dirty” (toxic, polluted, infected) waters due to the impact on health or 
even death, which was firmly embedded in the collective consciousness. As the Bible 
states [1], even God has used toxic waters to punish the Egyptians by turning the 
waters of the River Nile red.
After so many millennia of development and progress, human society has 
unfortunately reached a very grim state regarding global water quality. It is dimly 
expressed [2] as: “In many countries, both developing and developed, current pathways 
for water use are often not sustainable. . . The world faces a worsening series of local and 
regional water quantity and quality problems. . . Water resource constraints and water 
degradation are weakening one of the resource bases on which human society is built.” [ 2] 
The statement is so profoundly corroborated by the newest facts [ 3] based on 
scientific research, which can be summarized as:
(1) Only about 44% of global household wastewater is safely treated before 
being released, leaving a majority that is discharged without adequate 
treatment [4].
(2) Less than half of industrial wastewater is safely treated globally, contributing 
to chemical, nutrient, and pathogen contamination of rivers and lakes [ 4].
(3) By 2030, the health and livelihoods of up to 4.8 billion people could be at risk 
if water quality monitoring and treatment are not improved [ 4].
(4) Roughly half of the world’s population experiences severe water scarcity for 
at least part of the year, and water pollution aggravates these shortages by 
reducing usable freshwater [ 5].
(5) In lower-income countries, poor water quality is mainly due to low levels of 
wastewater treatment, whereas in higher-income countries, agricultural 
runoff is a leading pollution source [ 5].1 
(6)
Emerging water contaminants include pharmaceuticals, hormones, indus-
trial chemicals, detergents, and perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl sub -
stances (PFAS) – substances that are persistent in the environment and 
difficult to remove [ 5].
(7) Wastewater often carries mixtures of pollutants – including microplastics, 
pathogens, heavy metals, and chemicals – that can disrupt aquatic food webs 
and affect wildlife [ 6].
(8) Persistent, toxic “forever chemicals” (PFAS) are increasingly found in US 
tap water and are linked to cancer, immune system harm, and other serious 
health risks [7].
(9) Groundwater contamination from naturally occurring geologic elements – 
like arsenic, fluoride, selenium, and uranium – affects drinking water safety 
around the world. In some regions, a significant share of groundwater 
sources exceeds recommended guidelines [ 8].
(10) Global water quality is declining while water demand increases, requiring 
better wastewater management, pollution reduction, and monitoring to 
protect human and environmental health [ 5].
Many water quality indicators vary with flow conditions and over time. Without 
consistent monitoring, short-duration pollution events may be missed, delaying 
response and increasing impacts on ecosystems and drinking water supplies.2.
The marine environmentMoreover, 
the situation with the marine environment seems to be at least equally 
alarming, if not more so. Academics have already sounded the alarm about the 
destruction of global ecosystems [ 9]. Humanity must immediately and significantly 
alter our harmful trajectory in order to avoid irrevocably damaging our oceans in 
multiple ways that will further affect ocean health for both us and future 
generations. The ocean is the world’s largest realm, housing an astonishing array of 
biodiversity that provides critical ecological functions that ultimately support life on 
Earth [10].
Humanity relies on the ocean for livelihood and wellbeing, including a variety of 
benefits ranging from food production, tourism, pharmaceuticals, energy 
production, shipping, recreation, esthetics, culture, and scientific research. Although 
these services are not always quantifiable, humans heavily depend on an 
immeasurable number of services provided by a healthy ocean, including shoreline 
protection, nutrient and carbon cycling, climate and weather regulation, oxygen 
production, primary productivity, waste detoxification, and biodiversity 
maintenance [11]. Placing a global value on marine ecosystem services is difficult or 
even impossible, likely leading us to make the dangerous mistake of undervaluing the 
ocean despite the large body of evidence that a healthy ocean is critical to the success 
of all life on the planet.2
Water
Quality-AnEmergingConcernforaSustainableFuture
Approximately 
98% of the global ocean is already affected by multiple stressors, 
raising the concerning possibility of large-scale ecological collapse in a number of 
systems. While coastal habitats often experience the most significant damage, even 
remote offshore or deep-water habitats are not immune to increasing threats from 
human activities. Damage to marine habitats has accelerated rapidly around the 
world, with 76% of marine and estuarine species affected, including notable losses of 
50% of coral-reef cover [ 12] and 40% of kelp forests. Simultaneously, extensive 
biodiversity loss is occurring; populations of marine vertebrates decreased by an 
average of 22% from 1970 to 2008, with marine fish experiencing a higher decrease 
of 38%. More than 25 marine species have already been driven extinct, with 
extinction rates expected to increase sharply in the near future. In addition to 
biodiversity and habitat losses, human disruptions render marine ecosystems less 
resilient, considerably increasing their vulnerability to further disturbances [ 13].3.
Selected papers regarding water quality in this bookMany 
interesting works of high quality have been received during the preparation 
of this book. Especially notable are many papers coming from scientists who work in 
developing countries, who have meticulously documented harmful impacts on water 
quality and the consequent deleterious effects on their societies. While these 
attempts are quite commendable for creating awareness of the dangers linked to the 
deterioration of water quality for human health and the environment, this book 
seeks to present some novel aspects in monitoring, new methods, a comprehensive 
approach, or new technologies for the treatment and prevention of water pollution. 
And indeed, this book’s title has attracted some quite interesting research topics like 
contaminants of emerging concern, hydrodynamic cavitation technology for the 
degradation of organic pollutants, or a dual-wavelength continuous-flow 
nephelometer, just to name a few.4.
ConclusionsIt 
is evident that the global scientific community repeatedly and constantly points 
out the dangers of water quality deterioration and the urgent need for rapid, decisive 
actions to reverse the already deleterious effects. The current issue on water quality 
attempts to, once again, initiate the responsibility of the modern human society 
toward sustainable practice regarding water quality, but also overall and global care 
for Planet Earth. Through a modern approach and new insights, we hope to achieve 
strong momentum among decision makers to initiate much more intensive 
rehabilitation, prevention, and restoration activities in order to preserve water 
environments, human health, and biodiversity for future generations.Introductory 
Chapter: Water Quality – Emerging Concern for Sustainable Future 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.10171053
Author 
detailsSvetislav 
S. Krstić
Institute of Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Saints Cyril and 
Methodius University, Skopje, North Macedonia
*Address all correspondence to: svetakrstic@yahoo.com
© 
2026 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/ 
licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in 
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. 
4
Water
Quality-AnEmergingConcernforaSustainableFuture
References
[1]
Exodus 7:14-25 - Thus says the Lord, 
“By this you shall know that I am the 
Lord: Behold, with the staff that is in my 
hand I will strike the water that is in the 
Nile, and it shall turn into blood. The 
fish in the Nile shall die, and the Nile 
will stink, and the Egyptians will grow 
weary of drinking water from the Nile.”
[2] Meadows D, Randers J, Meadows D. 
Limits to Growth-the 30-year Update. 
Vermont: Chelsea Green Publishing 
Company; 2014
[3] What is water pollution? UN Water 
Development Report. 2026. Available 
from: https://www.unwater.org/publica 
tions/un-world-water-development- 
report-2026
[4] Water Quality and Wastewater. UN 
Water. 2024. Available from: https:// 
www.unwater.org/water-facts/water- 
quality-and-wastewater
[5] Water for Prosperity and Peace. UN 
World Water Development Report. 
2024. Available from: https://www. 
unwater.org/publications/un-world- 
water-development-report-2024
[6] The scourge of untreated 
wastewater: The economic, 
environmental and human costs of 
inaction. Economist impact, An 
initiative of Economist Impact and The 
Nippon Foundation. 2025
[7] Nitrate contaminates drinking water 
for almost 60 million people in cities 
across the country. EWG’s Tap water 
database. 2021
[8] Mukherjee A, Coomar P, Sarkar S, 
Johannesson KH, Fryar AE, 
Schreiber ME, Ahmed KM, Alam MA, 
Bhattacharya P, Bundschuh J, 
Burgess W. Arsenic and other geogenic 
contaminants in global groundwater. 
Nature Reviews Earth & Environment. 
2024;5(4):312–328. DOI: 10.1038/s4301 
7-024-00519-z
[9] Ripple WJ, et al. World scientists’ 
warning to humanity: A second notice. 
BioScience 2017;67:1026–1028
[10] Georgian S, et al. Scientists’ 
warning of an imperiled ocean. 
Biological Conservation. 
2022;272:109595
[11] Barbier E. Marine ecosystem 
services. Current Biology. 2017;27:11
[12] Eddy TD, et al. Global decline in 
capacity of coral reefs to provide 
ecosystem services. One Earth. 
2021;4:1278–1285
[13] Yi C, Jackson N. A Review of 
Measuring Ecosystem Resilience to 
Disturbance. Environmental Research 
Letters. 2021;16:053008Introductory 
Chapter: Water Quality – Emerging Concern for Sustainable Future 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.10171055