Inconsistent evidence on the impact of lay worker-delivered psychosocial interventions on substance use, mental health and quality of life among people who use illicit drugs outside healthcare settings: a systematic review | Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inconsistent evidence on the impact of lay worker-delivered psychosocial interventions on substance use, mental health and quality of life among people who use illicit drugs outside healthcare settings: a systematic review 
 
 
 Review 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 19 September 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inconsistent evidence on the impact of lay worker-delivered psychosocial interventions on substance use, mental health and quality of life among people who use illicit drugs outside healthcare settings: a systematic review
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Nguyen Thu Trang  
 ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-3261-2098 1 , Linda Lux 2 , Nguyen Bich Diep 1 , Jamie L. Conklin 3 , Ruth Verhey 4 , William C. Miller 5 , Vivian F. Go 6 , Le Minh Giang 1 & … Bradley N. Gaynes 7   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background People who use illicit drugs often avoid formal healthcare due to stigma and legal concerns. Lay worker-delivered interventions outside clinical settings offer an accessible alternative. This review evaluated the effectiveness of such interventions on substance use, mental health, and quality of life and explored the patterns across intervention characteristics, target populations and effectiveness. Method We included original studies with trial and pre-post designs. We searched PubMed, Cochrane CENTRAL, Embase, APA PsycINFO, trial registries and conducted citation searches. Title and abstract screening was assisted by machine learning; full-text screening, data extraction and risk of bias assessment were conducted independently by two reviewers. Findings were synthesized using a narrative approach. Results Thirteen studies met inclusion criteria: eight targeting people who use drugs in general, two focusing on women, two on men who have sex with men and one on chronic pain patients. Most studies were US-based with one study from a low-and-middle-income country. Risk of bias was low in one study, moderate in seven and high in five. Outcomes were synthesised based on the eight studies with low or moderate risk of bias (six randomised controlled trials and two pre-post studies). Substance use outcomes improved significantly in most studies; mental health outcomes also improved but rarely reached statistical significance. However, evidence on the additional benefits of lay worker-delivered components was inconsistent, with three trials reporting favourable effects (two statistically significant, p  = 0.015 and p  = 0.03; the third with significance not specified), and three trials reporting no significant differences. Trials with positive findings primarily focused on harm reduction and employed brief, structured interventions. The small number of studies and their methodological limitations warrant cautious interpretation. Conclusion Lay worker-delivered psychosocial interventions outside healthcare settings may offer an accessible approach for people who use illicit drugs. However, current evidence does not demonstrate consistent additional benefits compared with established interventions, and no clear patterns in effectiveness were identified across populations or intervention characteristics. These findings highlight the need for adequately powered trials incorporating strategies to improve retention and adherence, and implementation-focused research to evaluate the delivery of evidence-based interventions by lay workers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Treatment outcomes in patients with opioid use disorder initiated by prescription: a systematic review protocol
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 25 January 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Psychiatric factors associated with early-onset and poly-drug use: insights from a large-scale addiction registry
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 14 July 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Can mental health treatments help prevent or reduce intimate partner violence in low- and middle-income countries? A systematic review
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 14 February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Clinical Social Work 
 
 
 
 Third Sector Research 
 
 
 
 Quality of Life Research 
 
 
 
 Social Work Research 
 
 
 
 Social Work 
 
 
 
 Occupational Health Psychology 
 
 
 
 Substance Use Disorders and Treatment Interventions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Funding The study was supported by the National Institute of Health (1K43TW012620-01A1). The funder has no role in the design, conduct or reporting of this review. Author information Authors and Affiliations Center for Training and Research on Substance Abuse & HIV, Hanoi Medical University, Hanoi, Vietnam Nguyen Thu Trang, Nguyen Bich Diep & Le Minh Giang Raleigh, North Carolina, USA Linda Lux Health Sciences Library, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Jamie L. Conklin Friendship Bench, Harare, Zimbabwe Ruth Verhey Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA William C. Miller Department of Health Behavior, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Vivian F. Go Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, and Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Bradley N. Gaynes Authors Nguyen Thu Trang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Linda Lux View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Nguyen Bich Diep View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Jamie L. Conklin View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Ruth Verhey View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar William C. Miller View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Vivian F. Go View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Le Minh Giang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Bradley N. Gaynes View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding author Correspondence to
 Nguyen Thu Trang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Electronic supplementary material Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. Supplementary material 1 (download DOCX ) Supplementary material 2 (download DOCX ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Trang, N.T., Lux, L., Diep, N.B. et al. Inconsistent evidence on the impact of lay worker-delivered psychosocial interventions on substance use, mental health and quality of life among people who use illicit drugs outside healthcare settings: a systematic review.
 Subst Abuse Treat Prev Policy (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13011-026-00763-0 Download citation Received : 23 April 2026 Accepted : 02 September 2026 Published : 19 September 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s13011-026-00763-0 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 
 
 
 
 Profiles 
 
 
 
 Nguyen Thu Trang 
 
 
 
 
 View author profile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature