Wolves (Canis lupus) exhibit considerable dietary flexibility and may exploit nutrient-rich aquatic prey when seasonally abundant or during periods of reduced terrestrial prey availability. However, consumption of aquatic resources may expose wolves to methylmercury (MeHg), a contaminant of global concern mainly produced in aquatic environments. MeHg readily bioaccumulates and biomagnifies in aquatic food webs, potentially reaching concentrations associated with negative physiological and behavioural effects. Despite increasing evidence of aquatic prey consumption by wolves, the dietary pathways and magnitude of mercury exposure across northern wolf populations remain poorly understood. To address these knowledge gaps, I quantified mercury (Hg) exposure and diet biomarkers in wolves across two distinct spatial scales of North America. First, I analyzed total Hg (THg) concentrations and assessed risk of toxicity in 971 wolves from 13 locations across Alaska and Canada and quantified carbon and nitrogen stable isotope ratios (δ13C and δ15N values) in 300 individuals to identify dietary drivers of exposure. Second, I estimated proportional dietary contributions of 59 wolves within Denali National Park and Preserve (DNPP), Alaska, to assess how Hg exposure varied across areas with different salmon and ungulate availability. Overall, most wolves exhibited relatively low THg concentrations (1.11 ± 2.63 µg/g dry weight (dw)), although 29 individuals exceeded toxicological risk thresholds (&gt; 9.27 µg/g dw) and displayed stable isotope values indicative of aquatic prey consumption. Similar patterns were observed in DNPP, where wolves consumed more salmon and exhibited elevated THg concentrations (0.66 ± 0.83 µg/g dw) relative to areas with lower salmon availability and higher ungulate densities (0.25 ± 0.10 µg/g dw and 0.24 ± 0.14 µg/g dw). Additionally, I documented that wolves increased their salmon consumption in response to years with lower ungulate densities and peaks in small-mammal abundance. Together, this thesis provides the most comprehensive assessment of Hg exposure in wolves to date and identifies three major pathways of aquatic-derived Hg transfer to terrestrial predators through consumption of freshwater fish, marine mammals, and anadromous salmon. These findings demonstrate how cross-ecosystem foraging can increase Hg exposure in wolves and highlight the importance of aquatic prey as an alternative food resource.