Optimal co-fertilization of nitrogen (N) and zinc (Zn) offers a promising approach for promoting the growth of tea plant ( Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze), sustaining stable yield, and improving tea quality. However, the specific roles of rhizosphere microorganisms in mediating the tea yield and quality after N-Zn co-fertilization remain unclear. Here, a field experiment was carried out to assess the influence of N-Zn co-fertilization on the growth of tea plant, as well as the structure and functions of rhizosphere microbial communities in tea plantations. Results showed that N application contributed more to the increment of tea yield than Zn fertilization, whereas Zn supply significantly promoted the synthesis of free amino acids and reduced tea polyphenol contents as well as TP/AA at moderate N level. Zn addition decreased the level of soil NO 3 − ‐N but increased NH 4 + -N concentrations at both moderate and high N levels. Soil metagenomic sequencing indicated that Zn supply significantly increased the relative abundances of microbial taxa involved in denitrification, such as Arthrobacter , Bacillus , Terrabacter and Burkholderia , as well as up-regulated the relative abundances of narH , nasA , nasB , napB , nirB , nirD and norB genes at high N level, which are related to some metabolic potential pathways like denitrification and nitrate reductase. Partial least squares path models showed that fertilization initially altered soil properties and enzyme activities, thereby affecting rhizosphere microbial communities and functional gene profiles, which sequentially contributed to the nutrient accumulation in tea plants and ultimately influenced tea yield. Random forest analysis further identified soil properties such as pH, OM, AP, NH 4 + -N, NO 3 − -N and AZn as the most influential factors affecting tea yield and quality. Overall, our results highlight the relationship between tea yield and quality with rhizosphere microbial communities and functional gene profiles under different N-Zn co-fertilizations. All these findings provide new perspective for nutrient use and management in tea plantations.