Functional division between root endosphere and rhizosphere microbiomes supports seagrass holobiont resilience under high nutrient and sulfide exposure | Microbiome | Springer Nature Link 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 BMC journals have moved to Springer Nature Link. Learn more about website changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 
 
 
 Functional division between root endosphere and rhizosphere microbiomes supports seagrass holobiont resilience under high nutrient and sulfide exposure 
 
 
 Research 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 
 
 Published: 02 October 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 You have full access to this open access article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 Aims and scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Functional division between root endosphere and rhizosphere microbiomes supports seagrass holobiont resilience under high nutrient and sulfide exposure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wenqian Qi 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Zhijian Jiang 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Xu Long 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Jing Ren 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Yin Huang 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Uditha Thejan Egodauyana 1 , 2 , Yang Fang 1 , 2 , 5 , Yunchao Wu 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , Songlin Liu 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 & … Xiaoping Huang 1 , 2 , 3 , 4   Show authors 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 61 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore all metrics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Abstract Background Coastal eutrophication leads to the co-occurrence of high nutrient loading and sulfide exposure, posing severe threats to the health of seagrass ecosystems. Yet the underlying adaptive mechanisms of the seagrass holobiont remain poorly understood. Here, we conducted a large-scale field investigation along a tropical natural gradient of nutrient and sulfide to examine the adaptive mechanisms of seagrass holobiont. By integrating plant physiology, stable isotopes, metabolomics, 16S rRNA amplicon, and shotgun metagenomics, we particularly explored the interaction between seagrass host and associated microbiome. Results The seagrass host exhibited physiological and metabolic patterns consistent with a growth-defense trade-off, with high nutrient conditions showing a more growth-related metabolite profile and sulfide exposure coinciding with a stronger antioxidant defense-related metabolite profile. The metabolic reprogramming was accompanied by changes in the relative abundance of several root exudates, including flavonoids and phenylpropanoids, rather than a significant bulk compositional shift. These differential exudates showed compartment-specific relationships with microbiome composition, with nitrogen-cycling taxa preferentially associated with the root endosphere under high nutrient conditions and sulfur-cycling taxa preferentially enriched in the rhizosphere under sulfide exposure. Notably, this putative functional division of labor appeared to be reconfigured under dual pressure, with endosphere communities showing greater representation of taxa putatively related to sulfur cycling. In addition, the rhizosphere microbiome showed stressor-tailored genomic potential, with sulfur oxidation and transfer related genes (e.g., fccBA and dsrEF ) more prominent under sulfide exposed conditions and redundant ammonia assimilation potential (e.g., gltD) under nutrient-enriched conditions, potentially relevant to nutrient stress mitigation. Conclusion This work suggests that seagrass holobiont resilience to co-occurring nutrient and sulfide exposure may be associated with host changes in root exudation and compartmentalized microbiome functional potential. We propose that the putative functional division of root microbiota provides a useful ecological framework for developing microbiome-informed seagrass restoration and conservation strategies. 
 Video Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How does the root microbiome functionally adapt to nutrient and sulfide stress? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What mechanisms support seagrass holobiont resilience under environmental stress? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rhizosphere microbiome dynamics in tropical seagrass under short-term inorganic nitrogen fertilization
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 04 January 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Teasing apart the host-related, nutrient-related and temperature-related effects shaping the phenology and microbiome of the tropical seagrass Halophila stipulacea 
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 15 April 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Environmental factors and biotic interactions shape the regional-scale assembly of rhizosphere microbial communities associated with Suaeda salsa 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 13 November 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning. 
 
 
 
 Biogeosciences 
 
 
 
 Plant Secondary Metabolism 
 
 
 
 Rhizobial symbiosis 
 
 
 
 Symbiosis 
 
 
 
 Microbiome 
 
 
 
 Abiotic 
 
 
 
 Seagrass Ecosystem Dynamics and Conservation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to SHANGHAI BIOTREE BIOMEDICAL TECHNOLOGY CO., LTD. (Shanghai, China) for performing the UHPLC-QTRAP-MS/MS-based metabolomic profiling of root metabolites and exudates. The authors thank Guangdong Magigene Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Guangzhou, China) for conducting the 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing and shotgun metagenomics sequencing of root endophytic and rhizosphere microbiome. We appreciate the support from the Ocean Negative Carbon Emissions (ONCE) Program and the China-Sri Lanka Joint Center for Education and Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Funding This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U25A20795, 42176158, 42576139); the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFF1301402); the Hainan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (425CXTD622); the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province, China (2024B1212050003, 2023B1212060047); the Special Fund of South China Sea Institute of Oceanology of Chinese Academy of Sciences (SCSIO2023QY04); and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS (2023359). Author information Authors and Affiliations State Key Laboratory of Tropical Oceanography, Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-Resources and Ecology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510301, China Wenqian Qi, Zhijian Jiang, Xu Long, Jing Ren, Yin Huang, Uditha Thejan Egodauyana, Yang Fang, Yunchao Wu, Songlin Liu & Xiaoping Huang University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, PR China Wenqian Qi, Zhijian Jiang, Xu Long, Jing Ren, Yin Huang, Uditha Thejan Egodauyana, Yang Fang, Yunchao Wu, Songlin Liu & Xiaoping Huang Sanya National Marine Ecosystem Research Station, Tropical Marine Biological Research Station in Hainan, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Sanya, 572000, China Wenqian Qi, Zhijian Jiang, Xu Long, Jing Ren, Yin Huang, Yunchao Wu, Songlin Liu & Xiaoping Huang Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Biotechnology of Hainan Province, Sanya Institute of Ocean Eco-Environmental Engineering, Sanya, 572000, China Wenqian Qi, Zhijian Jiang, Xu Long, Jing Ren, Yin Huang, Yunchao Wu, Songlin Liu & Xiaoping Huang Eco-Environmental Monitoring and Research Center, Pearl River Valley and South China Sea Ecology and Environment Administration, Ministry of Ecology and Environment, Guangzhou, China Yang Fang Authors Wenqian Qi View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Zhijian Jiang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xu Long View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Jing Ren View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yin Huang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Uditha Thejan Egodauyana View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yang Fang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Yunchao Wu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Songlin Liu View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Xiaoping Huang View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Zhijian Jiang or Xiaoping Huang . Ethics declarations 
 
 
 Ethics approval and consent to participate 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Consent for publication 
 Not applicable. 
 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Zhijian Jiang will handle correspondence at all stages of refereeing and publication, also post-publication. Supplementary Information Additional file 1: Figure S1-S15. (download DOCX ) Additional file 2: Table S1-S8. (download XLSX ) Additional file 3: Supplementary Data S1. Total-ion chromatograms of all individual root metabolomics samples. (download ZIP ) Additional file 4: Supplementary Data S2. Total-ion chromatograms of all individual root exudate metabolomics samples. (download ZIP ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Qi, W., Jiang, Z., Long, X. et al. Functional division between root endosphere and rhizosphere microbiomes supports seagrass holobiont resilience under high nutrient and sulfide exposure.
 Microbiome (2026). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-026-02553-z Download citation Received : 06 January 2026 Accepted : 12 September 2026 Published : 02 October 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-026-02553-z Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 Keywords Seagrass holobiont Growth-defense trade-off Functional division Nutrient and sulfide exposure Stress resilience 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ask a research question 
 
 
 Get related insights from Springer Nature content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 How does the root microbiome functionally adapt to nutrient and sulfide stress? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What mechanisms support seagrass holobiont resilience under environmental stress? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Or ask your own question 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 Search by keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 Find a journal
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us
 
 
 
 
 
 Track your research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Footer Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Discover content 
 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 
 Books A-Z 
 
 Subjects A-Z 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 Journal finder 
 
 Publish your research 
 
 Language editing 
 
 Open access publishing 
 
 
 
 
 
 Products and services 
 
 
 Our products 
 
 Librarians 
 
 Societies 
 
 Partners and advertisers 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our brands 
 
 
 Springer 
 
 Nature Portfolio 
 
 BMC 
 
 Palgrave Macmillan 
 
 Apress 
 
 Discover 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Corporate Navigation 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies 
 
 
 
 
 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Accessibility statement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Terms and conditions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy policy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Help and support 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Legal notice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancel contracts here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not affiliated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 &copy; 2026 Springer Nature