Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...85
UDC 519.6
MODELING OF THE PROCESS OF UNSTEADY
FILTRATION OF GROUNDW ATER WITH A FREE SURF ACE
TAKING INTO ACCOUNT INFILTRATION FLOWS
*Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
*ravshanzade-09@mail.ru
Digital Technologies and Artificial Intelligence Development Research Institute,
17A, Buz-2, Tashkent, 100125 Uzbekistan
A nonlinear mathematical model with boundary, initial and internal conditions is
proposed for monitoring and forecasting unsteady groundwater seepage with a free sur-
face, taking into account infiltration flows and the hydrodynamic parameters of the soil.
To determine the main factors directly influencing groundwater level changes over time,
a minimizing functional is presented, which allows one to determine the ranges of the
significant parameters in which they substantially influence the infiltration process. The
problem is solved numerically by the locally one-dimensional scheme of A. A. Samarskii;
numerical experiments on model problems showed that the best results are achieved by
applying the principle of symmetrization. A model problem for a symmetric domain with
a square boundary and a square infiltration region was solved. Analysis of the results
showed that, for a constant seepage coefficient, the infiltration front propagates abso-
lutely symmetrically over time within the seepage domain, as expected from physical
considerations. It was established that the locally one-dimensional scheme is effective for
this class of problems, can be successfully applied in combination with the symmetriza-
tion method and can be recommended for solving problems of modeling and forecasting
the groundwater regime.
Keywords:mathematical model, numerical algorithm, groundwater, computational ex-
periments, hydrodynamic parameters, infiltration front
Citation:Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S. 2026. Modeling of the process of unsteady filtra-
tion of groundwater with a free surface taking into account infiltration flows.Problems
of Computational and Applied Mathematics. 4(74): 85-101.
DOI:10.71310/pcam.4_74.2026.05
1 Introduction
In recent years, the issue of water resource scarcity and protection from pollution
to ensure high-quality drinking water has become particularly pressing. Statistical data
show that only 2.5–3% of the Earth’s water resources are freshwater, of which only about
1% is readily accessible for use, with the rest being glaciers and deep groundwater. Re-
search has shown that approximately 2.2 billion people lack access to drinking water,
and 2 billion live in countries with water shortages. Most of these people live in Africa,
Asia, northeastern Mexico, the western United States, Argentina, Chile, and China. The
majority of freshwater resources (over 60%) are concentrated in a few countries, including
Brazil, Russia, Canada, the United States, and China. The vast majority of these global
freshwater reserves are hidden in the glaciers of Antarctica, Greenland, and the Arctic,
and only a small fraction (1%) is accessible for human use — in lakes, rivers, and springs.
According to scientists, in a quarter of a century we could face a threatening situation:
water reserves will be halved, and half of them will be polluted and unusable [1].
86 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
The search for new sources of fresh water has, paradoxically, led scientists to the
deep sea. Drilling in various parts of the planet has revealed that vast reserves of fresh
water are hidden deep within the seafloor. The formation of these deposits was most
likely caused by the Ice Age, or rather its end. During that cold period, part of the
Earth’s territory now occupied by the World Ocean was dry land. In these areas, water
gradually accumulated, and when the glaciers rapidly melted, the accumulated resource
simply “sank to the bottom”, with fresh water separated from salt water by layers of clay
and silt.
From the analysis of long-term statistical data it is known that the water reserves
on the globe amount to 1.4 billion km 3; of this, salt water (oceans) accounts for
1 365 000 000 km 3 (97.5%) and fresh water for 35 000 000 km 3 (2.5%). The replenishment
of groundwater reserves occurs due to precipitation, and the largest part of precipitation
falls in Asia (30%) and South America (27% of the world’s total). The world’s popu-
lation is growing rapidly, and estimates show that with current water use methods, by
2030 there will be a 40% gap between the projected demand and the available fresh water
reserves [2].
As we know, the causes of the water crisis are related to the problem of water resource
shortage; this is not a natural process but the result of human activity, and the main
reasons are as follows:
– the main sources of fresh water are rivers, lakes, and swamps; however, the natural dis-
tribution of resources is, unfortunately, uneven across the globe: for example, Europe
accounts for 20% of the planet’s population, but only 7% of its reserves;
– the number of people on Earth is growing daily, and with them the demand for drinking
water; therefore, if the annual population growth is 84 million, the required increase
in water resources must be at least 60 million cubic meters;
– inappropriate use of natural resources, i.e., pollution of water sources (industrial waste,
emissions, fertilizer runoff from fields); for example, in America 37% of rivers and lakes
are so polluted that they cannot even be used for irrigation or domestic needs;
– the positive factor of agricultural development worldwide also contributes negatively
to this problem: this sector’s water requirements account for 85% of the total, and
therefore the price of artificially irrigated products is significantly higher;
– one of the global causes is the greenhouse effect, as more and more gases are emitted
into the atmosphere; the Earth’s climate is changing every year, and snowfall in hot
climates and unnatural frosts in countries like Italy and Spain are all consequences of
precipitation redistribution [3].
Based on the above, effective groundwater protection and wastewater treatment re-
quire the development of efficient methods and tools based on comprehensive studies
of groundwater filtration processes in multilayer porous media. The inadequacy of tra-
ditional irrigation methods and the use of salinized lands in agriculture have resulted
in significant amounts of brackish return water resources in Uzbekistan. Experience has
shown that surface and groundwater sources continue to be polluted by mineral fertilizers,
pesticides, and highly mineralized and polluted drainage water used in agriculture.
Mathematical modeling and computational experiments are effective tools for re-
search, monitoring, forecasting, and management decision-making. Mathematical models
of groundwater filtration in multilayer porous media are typically described by systems
of partial differential equations with corresponding boundary and internal conditions of
various types. Significant applied and fundamental results have already been obtained in
the development of mathematical tools for solving such problems.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...87
In particular, work [4] addressed the problem of unsteady groundwater filtration in the
clay core of a high rock-and-earth dam, using the Nurek Hydroelectric Power Plant (HPP)
dam as an example. Numerical calculations were performed on a computing system using
the developed mathematical and software tools. A 30-year operational period of the Nurek
HPP dam was studied. Calculations during this time showed that only the lower portion
of the dam core was fully saturated with water. This confirmed the conclusions previously
drawn using other methods regarding the relatively slow establishment of a quasi-static
filtration regime in similar structures. According to the authors, the difference in results
is explained by previously adopted assumptions and a more sophisticated filtration model
in the Plaxis 2D software suite. The model used in this suite allows for the accounting of
changes in soil transmissivity depending on its water saturation.
The study [5] examines the process of modeling transient fluid flow in a reservoir sys-
tem. A mathematical model of groundwater flow in porous media is developed based on
parabolic partial differential equations with various initial, boundary, and internal condi-
tions, and an analytical solution is obtained using the Laplace transform. Computational
experiments were conducted to determine the pressure change along the length of the
filter layers without considering the elastic regime, and it was found that the pressure in
both layers increases exponentially. The computational experiment established that water
flow through the interface between the filter layers depends significantly on the piezocon-
ductivity of the highly permeable layer. The authors obtained a new generalized formula
for well adit control and developed a mathematical framework that allows for the design
of vertical drainage well layouts and capacity plans to protect irrigated and non-irrigated
areas from flooding, as well as to protect groundwater from pollution sources and isolate
already contaminated areas.
Modeling of nonlinear groundwater filtration processes in multilayer heterogeneous
porous media is considered in [6]. The key hydrodynamic parameters affecting ground-
water filtration in multilayer heterogeneous porous media are analyzed, particularly the
nonlinear nature of fluid flow and fluid transfer between different layers.
In [7], a mathematical model is proposed for monitoring and predicting nonlinear
groundwater filtration processes in multilayer heterogeneous porous media. This model
represents a complex domain that integrates various mathematical and physical principles,
the nonlinear nature of fluid flow, and the interaction between different layers of porous
materials. The paper provides a detailed analysis of fundamental and applied research in
the field of groundwater filtration in heterogeneous and multilayer porous media, based
on the laws of H. Darcy, J. Dupuit, N. E. Zhukovsky, P. Forchheimer, and others.
A numerical simulation model is proposed in [8] to assess the impact of the key hy-
drodynamic parameters on groundwater levels over a specified period. For this purpose,
a structured model was created for the Beijing Plain region and run using the GMS 10.6
software with a finer grid around the reservoirs. The model’s accuracy agrees well with
real data, and the overall average relative error is less than 20%. Comparison of the calcu-
lated water balance with the results of numerous studies shows that the reliability of the
equilibrium analysis results is relatively high. The numerical groundwater model is used
to predict water levels over a 15-year period. The simulation results also demonstrate
the impact of several projects related to the South-North Water Diversion Project, imple-
mented to restore overexploited groundwater resources. The model predicts stabilization
and a significant rise in groundwater levels in central Beijing.
In [9], an analytical approach for mathematical modeling of groundwater flows in a
vertically inclined multilayer porous medium with an unconfined aquifer was proposed. A
88 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
mathematical toolkit was built for this approach. The analytical solution of the problem
was obtained using the eigenfunction expansion method, which can be applied to any
vertically multilayered soil stratification with time-varying rainfall. The authors validated
the obtained solution using previous analytical solutions and numerical results simulated
using the Modflow software.
The authors of [10] proposed an effective physics-based deep learning model for solving
multiphase flow problems in three-dimensional heterogeneous porous media, fully utilizing
the capabilities of convolutional neural networks. The model utilizes input data, including
porous medium properties, fluid properties, and well control parameters, and predicts
spatiotemporal changes in pressure and saturation. While maintaining continuous fluid
flow, the three-dimensional spatial domain is decomposed into 2D images. The model
performs forecasting with a speedup of approximately 1400 times compared to physically
based modeling, and the average time errors of predicted pressure and saturation values
are 0.27% and 0.099%, respectively. Furthermore, a separate simulation model is created
as a postprocessor for calculating well flow rates based on state variable predictions from
the deep learning model, where water flow rates are effectively predicted with an average
error of less than 5%. Based on the authors’ unique design for ensuring accurate fluid flow
in porous media, the deep learning model with physically based constraints can become an
effective predictive model for computationally complex inverse problems or other related
processes.
A new method for constructing hybrid macropore-Darcy models based on micro-CT
images of microporous rocks is presented in [11]. Darcy cells effectively capture microscale
connectivity variations absent in macroscopic networks. In this approach, the authors
extract macropore networks using conventional methods, while microporosity is charac-
terized using segmented phase classification and incorporated into the model as Darcy
cells. This two-component model therefore incorporates both the traditional macroscopic
pore structure and critical flow paths in underresolved microporous regions. The pro-
posed workflow is thoroughly validated by comparing permeability estimates with direct
numerical simulation (DNS) and experimental measurements. The results demonstrate
that this hybrid approach reliably reproduces fluid flow behavior in complex porous media
while significantly reducing computational requirements.
In [12], the process of two-dimensional water movement under the influence of gravity
in a heterogeneous unsaturated porous medium is modeled at various infiltration rates.
The authors confirm that, depending on the saturation rate, the nature of moisture move-
ment can transition from stable (diffusion) to unstable (formation of “fingers” — finger
flow) and back. To describe these phenomena, a semi-continuum model is proposed that
accurately reproduces the transitions between flow types and characterizes the width and
distance between fluid flow channels. This model takes into account the phenomenon of
“saturation overshoot” and allows for more accurate modeling of unstable water distribu-
tion in a porous medium.
In [13], mathematical modeling of the problem of nonlinear groundwater filtration in
a heterogeneous porous medium is considered, taking into account evaporation and in-
filtration from the daylight surface. The authors of this article focus on the influence
of nonlinear effects on the distribution and dynamics of seepage flows in porous media,
where the proposed model is described by a system of nonlinear partial differential equa-
tions. Numerical methods, including difference schemes and iterative algorithms, were
used to integrate the problem, ensuring the stability and convergence of calculations.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...89
The developed numerical algorithm is implemented as software designed to solve various
hydrogeological and land reclamation forecasting problems.
As noted in [14], studying the hydrodynamic regime of groundwater, in particular the
formation of new freshwater reserves and monitoring their quantitative and qualitative
indicators, is of significant scientific and practical importance. Consequently, the authors
of this article analyzed the main causes of groundwater level fluctuations in two-layer
environments, including precipitation and evaporation, sources of water abstraction and
recharge, the geological structure and permeability characteristics between layers, hy-
draulic gradient, flow directions, irrigation infiltration, permeability coefficient, porosity,
layer thickness, drainage, and other factors. To accurately model water level changes in
open and confined aquifers, a mathematical model was developed that takes into account
the physical, geological, and hydrogeological parameters of the study area. The problem
was described using mathematical and numerical modeling of geofiltration and geomigra-
tion processes. The model is represented by nonlinear differential equations that have no
analytical solution due to the presence of free variables. Therefore, a fully robust numeri-
cal solution scheme based on high-precision approximation was proposed. Solutions were
obtained using iterative calculations and forward and backward substitution methods.
The study also considered parameters such as soil density, effective porosity, and third-
order open boundary conditions. As a result, the model provides reliable predictions for
determining groundwater flow and changes in its quality, and this method offers practical
solutions that can be applied in water resources management and planning.
The development of a nonlinear mathematical model for studying, predicting, and
making decisions on transient groundwater flow in a three-layer heterogeneous aquifer
system, including a confined aquifer, a capping layer, and a low-permeability barrier, is
discussed in [15], where the mathematical model incorporates infiltration and evaporation,
governed by the law of M. M. Krylov and S. F. A veryanov. In the mathematical formula-
tion, the evaporation rate depends on the critical groundwater level and takes into account
periodic fluctuations in precipitation and evaporation, as well as the changing permeabil-
ity of the boundaries. This approach enables realistic modeling of the dynamics of a
multilayered aquifer under various climatic and hydrogeological conditions, offering a reli-
able tool for sustainable groundwater management, drought risk assessment, and aquifer
protection strategies. The authors used an implicit difference scheme for the numerical
integration of the problem.
As emphasized in the work [16], the method of mathematical modeling is an important
tool for solving complex problems related to the analysis of groundwater dynamics and
heat and mass transfer processes in them when studying their pollution from various an-
thropogenic sources in the event of emergency spills of chemically hazardous substances,
etc. Based on the above, the work is devoted to the development of a set of mathe-
matical tools for monitoring and forecasting the filtration process of unconfined ground-
water, mass transfer of impurities and the heat transfer process in groundwater, where
the two-dimensional Boussinesq filtration equation was used for their solution. In the
work, the freezing process of individual sections of the groundwater flow is modeled using
the Laplace equation, and to calculate the flow velocity field in time-varying geometry a
two-dimensional heat transfer equation in groundwater is used. Finite difference schemes
were used to solve the model equations of groundwater dynamics and heat and mass
transfer. The experiment confirmed the adequacy of the constructed numerical model
of filtration of unconfined groundwater flow. An effective mathematical model has been
developed for determining temperature fields in groundwater during the operation of a
90 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
well used to freeze specific sections of the flow. Computer simulation results demonstrate
the effectiveness of the developed mathematical models.
Based on the analysis of the literature, this paper proposes a mathematical model
for monitoring and forecasting groundwater levels, taking into account factors such as
infiltration and evaporation and changes in the hydrodynamic parameters of the soil
depending on the groundwater pressure.
2 Problem statement
The work focuses on the process of groundwater filtration in a porous medium, where
the infiltration factor is taken into account, including an assessment of the inflow of water
into underground horizons due to precipitation, through the use of methods for their
balance over time and the determination of quantitative indicators of water intake and
consumption over a certain period and in a certain area, as well as the use of geophysical,
hydrogeological and mathematical methods for modeling the object as a whole.
As is known, infiltration recharge is formed under the influence of natural factors that
determine the intensity of atmospheric precipitation in the region under consideration,
the time of year and the recharge of surface watercourses and reservoirs (Fig. 1).
Figure 1Sources of infiltration recharge.
Taking into account the above, in order to conduct a comprehensive study of unsteady
filtration of groundwater with a free surface in a heterogeneous porous medium with a
variable aquifer area, we consider the following problem, which is described by a nonlinear
partial differential equation:
𝑚𝜕𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
𝜕𝑡 = 𝜕
𝜕𝑥
{︂
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝐻) [𝑏(𝑥,𝑦)−𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)] 𝜕𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
𝜕𝑥
}︂
+
+ 𝜕
𝜕𝑦
{︂
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝐻) [𝑏(𝑥,𝑦)−𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)] 𝜕𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
𝜕𝑦
}︂
±𝜙(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡),
(1)
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...91
where𝐻is the desired height of the free surface with respect to a certain horizontal plane
taken as the reference plane;κis an isotropic function corresponding to the filtration
coefficient of the heterogeneous porous medium;𝑏is the height of the aquifer bed, which
is a function of the spatial coordinates;𝜙is the magnitude of infiltration or evaporation,
variable over the aquifer area;𝑚is the porosity coefficient.
To determine infiltration or evaporation, the following relationship can be used:
𝜙(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =𝑞 0
(︂
1− ℎ−𝐻
ℎ−𝐻 cr
)︂𝑛
.
Here𝑞 0 is the intensity of evaporation (infiltration) at the daylight surface, which depends
on weather and climate factors and the time of soil irrigation;𝐻 cr is the critical depth of
groundwater;𝑛is an exponent;ℎis the thickness of the aquifer.
An analysis of the literature has shown that the filtration coefficient, which is the main
hydrodynamic parameter of the process, varies depending on the groundwater pressure.
As indicated in [17], for small changes in groundwater pressure the filtration coefficient
can be taken as a linear relationship
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =κ 0(𝑥,𝑦)
(︀
1−𝑎 𝑘
(︀
𝐻0(𝑥,𝑦)−𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
)︀)︀
,
and for large changes in pressure — in exponential form
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =κ 0(𝑥,𝑦)𝑒 𝑎𝑘(𝐻0(𝑥,𝑦)−𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)),
whereκ 0(𝑥,𝑦)is the initial value of the filtration coefficient at𝑡= 0,𝑎 𝑘 is the coefficient
of change in permeability.
As noted in the work [18], for a realistic description of the mathematical model of the
process, one can also use an empirical dependence of the form
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =κ 0(𝑥,𝑦)
(︂𝑚
𝑚0
)︂𝑑
,
where𝑚 0 is the initial value of the porosity of the inhomogeneous medium,𝑑is a constant
determined from experimental data.
In [19], several analytical representations of the law of change in permeability due to
changes in groundwater pressure are proposed in the form of a power law
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =κ 0(𝑥,𝑦)
(︀
1−𝑎 𝑘
(︀
𝐻0(𝑥,𝑦)−𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
)︀)︀𝑛−1
,
where the index𝑛takes the values 2, 3 and 4, respectively, and in the work [20] a
dependence of the following type was used to calculate the filtration coefficient:
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) =κ 0(𝑥,𝑦)
(︂𝐻
𝐻0
)︂𝑎𝑘
.
To complete the mathematical formulation of the problem, the internal boundary
conditions on the well contours can correspond to the regime of specified withdrawals or
groundwater levels as functions of time. As is known, another significant hydrodynamic
parameter that influences groundwater filtration is the porosity of the aquifer, which
varies depending on the aquifer’s internal pressure head. As the effective stress changes,
the forces compressing each rock grain decrease as the groundwater pressure increases.
92 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
Therefore, as the pressure head falls, the grain volume increases and the pore volume
decreases.
To integrate equation (1), in the first case the boundary condition is represented by
the relationship
𝑄𝑗(𝑡) =
∫︁
𝛾𝑗
κ(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡) 𝜕𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)
𝜕𝑛 𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)𝑑𝑠.(2)
Here𝑄 𝑗 is the flow rate of the𝑗-th well,𝜕𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)/𝜕𝑛is the derivative along the external
normal to the circular contour𝛾 𝑗 of the𝑗-th well,𝑑𝑠is the length element of the contour.
In the second case, the height of the free surface at the well is known, which, for design
reasons, is constant along the entire supply contour:
𝐻(𝑥 𝑐𝑘,𝑦𝑐𝑘) =𝜓 𝑘(𝑡).(3)
Here𝑥 𝑐𝑘,𝑦 𝑐𝑘 are the coordinates of the𝑘-th well,𝑘=𝜈 1,𝜈 2,𝜈 1 +𝜈 2 =𝑛, where𝜈 1 or𝜈 2
can be equal to zero, which corresponds to the conditions of given withdrawals or given
groundwater levels at all wells.
External boundary conditions can be of the most general form; in particular, on the
contour𝐺the height of the free surface is known as a function of time:
𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)| 𝐺 =𝜓(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡).(4)
The initial condition determines the distribution of the groundwater level in the region
𝐺up to the boundary:
𝐻(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡)| 𝑡=0 =𝐻 0(𝑥,𝑦).(5)
3 Method of solution
The most general boundary value problem under consideration in a multiply connected
domain is complex, and therefore obtaining analytical solutions is practically impossible.
From the formulation of the boundary value problem (1)–(5), it is clear that the mathe-
matical difficulties encountered in solving it are due to the following circumstances:
– the differential equation describing unsteady groundwater filtration with a free surface
in a heterogeneous porous medium is a nonlinear, inhomogeneous partial differential
equation with variable coefficients;
– the integration domain of the problem has an arbitrary outer boundary with a given
finite number of internal contours, and the external boundary conditions and the initial
condition are represented by functional dependencies;
– the internal conditions are non-identical functions of time (corresponding to specified
functions or their derivatives on the contour);
– the dimensions of the internal contours are extremely small compared to the dimen-
sions of the outer boundary of the domain.
Based on the above, we solve the problem using the finite difference method on a
computer system, employing the technology proposed by A. A. Samarskii (the splitting
method). To do this, we first pass to dimensionless variables, convenient for performing
numerical calculations on a computer system, using the relations
𝐻𝛿 = 𝐻
𝐻𝑥
,κ 𝛿 = κ
κ𝑥
, 𝑏 𝛿 = 𝑏
𝐻𝑥
, 𝜙 𝛿 = 𝐿2
κ𝑥𝐻2
𝑥
𝜙, 𝑥 𝛿 = 𝑥
𝐿, 𝑦 𝛿 = 𝑦
𝐿, 𝑡 𝛿 = κ𝑥𝐻𝑥
𝑚𝐿2 𝑡.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...93
Here the index “𝛿” denotes dimensionless quantities,𝐻 𝑥 andκ 𝑥 are certain characteristic
quantities, and𝐿is the greatest distance from the origin to the outer boundary. Then
the differential equation under consideration takes the form
𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑡 = 𝜕
𝜕𝑥
[︂
κ(𝑏−𝐻) 𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑥
]︂
+ 𝜕
𝜕𝑦
[︂
κ(𝑏−𝐻) 𝜕𝐻
𝜕𝑦
]︂
±𝜙(𝑥,𝑦,𝑡),(6)
whereκ,𝑚,𝑏,𝑥,𝑦are positive dimensionless variables (the index𝛿is omitted).
Approximating the derivatives in (6) by their grid analogs according to the three-
point implicit finite-difference scheme, we obtain a system of two locally one-dimensional
difference equations:
Δ𝑥
[︁
κ𝑖,𝑗
(︁
˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗
)︁
∇𝑥 ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗
]︁
=𝜒
(︂Δ𝜉2
Δ𝑡 ·Δ𝑡·𝐻 𝑖,𝑗−𝜙·Δ𝜉 2
)︂
;(7)
Δ𝑦
[︁
κ𝑖,𝑗
(︁ ˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗
)︁
∇𝑦
˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗
]︁
= (1−𝜒)
(︂Δ𝜉2
Δ𝑡 ·Δ𝑡· ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝜙·Δ𝜉 2
)︂
.(8)
HereΔ 𝑥,Δ 𝑦,∇ 𝑥,∇ 𝑦 are the operators of the right and left differences in the directions
of the𝑥- and𝑦-axes, respectively (a right-handed coordinate system is used);Δ𝜉,Δ𝑡are
the steps of the spatial and temporal grids, respectively; the grid points(𝑖,𝑗)have the
coordinates𝑥 𝑖 =𝑖·Δ𝜉,𝑦 𝑗 =𝑗·Δ𝜉;𝜒is a parameter less than one; ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗 and ˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗 are the
desired solutions associated with𝐻 𝑖,𝑗, corresponding to the time layer𝑡 𝑛+1 = (1 +𝜒)·Δ𝑡.
Let us first consider the method for solving the system of finite-difference equations
(7) and (8) for a simply connected region and then generalize it to the case where there
are internal conditions. Let the solution of the boundary value problem at the previous
time level be known. By considering the locally one-dimensional difference equation (7)
for each row of the spatial grid under the given boundary conditions, an intermediate
solution ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗 can be found. Considering the resulting solution as the initial condition and
sequentially solving the locally one-dimensional difference equation (8) for each column of
the spatial grid, one obtains the solution ˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗. With a well-chosen value of the parameter
𝜒, for some regions the final solution can be considered the desired result at the time level
𝑡𝑛+1 = (1 +𝜒)·Δ𝑡.
However, as calculations on a high-speed computer show, the best results are obtained
by applying the principle of symmetrization. This method involves performing calcula-
tions not only in the order specified above, but also in the reverse order. If we denote
the solution obtained by successively solving equation (7) and then equation (8) by ˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗,
and the solution obtained by successively solving equation (8) and then (7) by ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗, then,
according to the symmetrization principle, the solution on the(𝑛+1)-th time layer should
be taken as the combination
𝐻𝑛+1
𝑖,𝑗 =𝜇· ˜˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗 + (1−𝜇)· ˜𝐻𝑖,𝑗.(9)
Experience shows that the values of the parameters𝜒and𝜇can be set to 0.5 when
using the symmetrization principle. The actual solution of equations (7) and (8) can be
obtained by successive application of the sweep and iteration methods. If we assume that
the nonlinear expressions in them are known from initial approximations, then finding
the first iteration is equivalent to solving a linear parabolic equation with given boundary
conditions. Using the sweep method, we can refine successive approximations in the
94 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
nonlinear expressions and find a solution of the nonlinear parabolic equation with any
desired accuracy.
We now turn to solving the boundary value problem with internal conditions. While
the issues of rational use of RAM, efficient numerical approximation of the initial opera-
tors, and saving computer time are significant for a boundary value problem in a simply
connected domain, in a problem with internal conditions, in addition to these, the funda-
mental problem of their approximation in the grid domain arises.
Research on approximating internal boundary conditions is of independent interest.
This is explained by the fact that wellbore contours cannot be approximated with any
practically applicable grid. Therefore, research was aimed at exploring the feasibility of
other approaches, in particular, replacing the wellbore with a point coinciding with a grid
node. It turned out that when approximating the wellbore contour with a point, the
desired solution at that particular node is fictitious, although the results at neighboring
nodes are correct. Moreover, the fictitious results correspond to a certain real wellbore
with a radius𝑅 𝜙 commensurate with the grid step and satisfying the relation
𝑅𝜙 = 0.2·Δ𝜉.
Thus, only the grid spacingΔ𝜉determines the radius of the enlarged fictitious well. Know-
ing the values of the desired function on the contour of the enlarged well and considering
them as time-varying boundary conditions of the first kind, we can further consider the
problem of determining the desired quantities on the contour of a well with radius𝑅 𝑐 and
in its vicinity. The problem is reduced to integrating differential equation (1) in the ring
𝑅𝑐 <𝜁 <𝑅 𝜙, 𝜁=
√︀
𝑥2 +𝑦 2,
where the wellbore conditions are described by equations (7) and (8). The latter problem
is obviously equivalent to the problem of plane-radial, i.e., one-dimensional, flow toward
the wellbore in a circular domain.
To approximate the internal conditions using finite-difference relations, we proceed as
follows. We isolate a fluid volume element with an axis of symmetry passing through
the singular point with coordinates𝑥 𝑖 and𝑦 𝑖 and consider the continuity equation for
this volume, whose projection onto the horizontal plane is a square with side lengthΔ𝜉.
Summing the inflow volumes through the lateral faces in the𝑥- and𝑦-axis directions, we
obtain the expression
(𝐻−𝑏) 𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝑉𝑖−0.5,𝑗·Δ𝜉−(𝐻−𝑏) 𝑖+0.5,𝑗·𝑉𝑖+0.5,𝑗·Δ𝜉+
+(𝐻−𝑏) 𝑖,𝑗−0.5·𝑉𝑖,𝑗−0.5·Δ𝜉−(𝐻−𝑏) 𝑖,𝑗+0.5·𝑉𝑖,𝑗+0.5·Δ𝜉.
For an ordinary node, this expression should be equal to the change in the volume under
consideration over the timeΔ𝑡taken with the opposite sign:
−Δ𝐻av
Δ𝑡 ·(Δ𝜉) 2,
where𝐻 av is the average value of the desired function in the domain
𝑥𝑖−0.5 ⩽𝑥⩽𝑥 𝑖+0.5, 𝑦 𝑗−0.5 ⩽𝑦⩽𝑦 𝑗+0.5.
For a singular node, the flow rate𝑄 𝑖,𝑗 at the point(𝑥 𝑖,𝑦𝑖)is added to this value. Under
conditions of infiltration or evaporation, it is necessary to add the value𝜙 𝑖,𝑗, where𝜙 𝑖,𝑗 >0
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...95
for infiltration and𝜙 𝑖,𝑗 <0for evaporation. Thus, taking into account that the filtration
rates obey Darcy’s law, we obtain
Δ𝑥 [κ𝑖,𝑗 (𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗)∇𝑥𝐻𝑖,𝑗] + Δ𝑦 [κ𝑖,𝑗 (𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗)∇𝑦𝐻𝑖,𝑗] =
=
(︂Δ𝜉
Δ𝑡·Δ𝑡·𝐻 𝑖,𝑗 +𝜙𝑖,𝑗·Δ𝜉 2
)︂
−𝑄𝑖,𝑗, (10)
where we accept that
Δ𝐻av
Δ𝑡 = Δ𝐻𝑖,𝑗
Δ𝑡 .
In relation (10) all quantities are dimensionless, and the dimensionless flow rate of the
well is equal to
𝑄𝛿 = 𝑄
κ𝑥·𝐻 2
𝑥
.
According to the splitting method, equation (10) must be represented in the form of
two locally one-dimensional equations:
Δ𝑥 [κ𝑖,𝑗 (𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗)∇𝑥𝐻𝑖,𝑗] =𝜒
[︂Δ𝜉2
Δ𝑡 ·Δ𝑡·𝐻 𝑖,𝑗−𝜀Δ𝜉 2−𝑄𝑖,𝑗
]︂
;(11)
Δ𝑦 [κ𝑖,𝑗 (𝐻𝑖,𝑗−𝑏𝑖,𝑗)∇𝑦𝐻𝑖,𝑗] = (1−𝜒)
[︂Δ𝜉2
Δ𝑡 ·Δ𝑡·𝐻 𝑖,𝑗−𝜀Δ𝜉 2−𝑄𝑖,𝑗
]︂
.(12)
Comparing (11) and (12) with equations (7) and (8), it is easy to see that they coincide
when𝐷 𝑖,𝑗 = 0, i.e., equations (11) and (12) are generalizations of the approximation for
an internal ordinary node to the case of a singular node.
Thus, we find that the method for solving the problem under consideration with
internal conditions represented by equation (10) is not fundamentally different from the
method described above for a simply connected domain. In the case where the conditions
on the internal contours are described by equations (11), the following iterative process
can be applied. According to Dupuit’s formula, the fluid flow rate in a well under steady-
state filtration conditions (at𝜓 𝑖,𝑗 = const) is
𝑄𝑖,𝑗 =
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−𝜓 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
· κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖,𝑗−0.5 +κ𝑖,𝑗+0.5
− 1
2𝜋
(︂
ln 𝑅𝑐
Δ𝜉·𝜀 + 1.61
)︂ .(13)
Assuming𝑄 𝑖,𝑗 = ¯𝑄𝑖,𝑗 in the first approximation, one can find successively all the remaining
approximations with a given degree of accuracy.
4 Model problems and computational experiments
4.1 The problem of spreading of an infiltration mound
As a result of artificial irrigation of land or natural phenomena such as precipitation,
a so-called infiltration mound develops. It is necessary to predict the persistent change
in groundwater level over time under the influence of the growth of this mound. This
problem is part of the more general problem of locating relief wells in areas likely to be
affected by infiltration mounds, reservoirs, or natural bodies of water.
Let us present the calculation formulas for this problem according to the algorithm
described above. For simplicity of presentation, in (7) we set𝑏 𝑖,𝑗 = 0and write it in the
form
𝑎𝑖𝐻2
𝑖−1,𝑗−𝑒𝑖𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗 +𝑐𝑖𝐻2
𝑖+1,𝑗 =−𝑑 𝑖,(14)
96 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
where the coefficients are defined as
𝑎𝑖 =κ 𝑖+0.5,𝑗;𝑒 𝑖 =κ 𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 +𝜒 Δ𝑥2
2𝐻(2)
𝑖,𝑗 Δ𝑡
;
𝑐𝑖 =κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗;𝑑 𝑖 =𝜒 Δ𝑥2
2𝐻(2)
𝑖,𝑗,𝑘
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗,𝑘+1 +𝜀Δ𝑥 2.
We seek the solution of system (14) in the form
𝐻2(𝑠+1)
𝑖,𝑗,𝑛+1 =𝛼 𝑖𝐻2(𝑠)
𝑖+1,𝑗,𝑘+1 +𝛽𝑖.(15)
From equation (14), using (15), we obtain the recurrence relations
𝛼𝑖 = 𝑐𝑖
𝑒𝑖−𝑎𝑖𝛼𝑖−1
, 𝛽 𝑖 = 𝑑𝑖 +𝑎𝑖𝛽𝑖−1
𝑒𝑖−𝑎𝑖𝛼𝑖−1
.
Moreover, from the boundary conditions we have
𝛼0 = 0, 𝛽 0 =𝐻 2
0.
A model problem was considered for a symmetric domain with a square boundary and
a central square infiltration region (Figs. 1, 2). The filtration coefficient was assumed to
be constant, and numerical experiments were conducted on a computing cluster. Analy-
sis of the numerical simulations showed that the infiltration front propagates absolutely
symmetrically over time within the considered infiltration region, as expected from phys-
ical considerations. Computational experiments were conducted forκ 0 = 0.05m/day,
𝜙= 0.0025m/day,𝐻 0 = 100m (Fig. 4). Based on the obtained results, it follows that
A. A. Samarskii’s locally one-dimensional scheme is effective for this class of problems
and can be recommended for solving modeling, forecasting, and other problems for real
hydrogeological objects. In the future, the presented numerical algorithm will be applied
to predicting changes in groundwater levels.
Figure 2Change in groundwater level over time at𝜙= 0.0025m/day.
As can be seen from the curve in Fig. 2, the groundwater level decreases over time
depending on the change in the infiltration parameter. A significant change in the ground-
water level is observed at𝑡>60days, after which it decreases linearly over time.
4.2 Unsteady groundwater inflow to a well
The objective of this problem is to conduct experimental calculations related to find-
ing an optimal formula for approximating the well conditions in finite differences. Two
methods for approximating the well boundary conditions were considered.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...97
We assume that the movement toward the enlarged well occurs according to Darcy’s
law. Then, for each moment in time, we have the following formula for the well flow rate:
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖+1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖−1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 +
+
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗+1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖,𝑗+0.5 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖,𝑗−0.5 =𝑄 ℓ, (16)
where𝑄 ℓ is the water flow rate at the well. If a given production rate is maintained at the
well, then𝑄 ℓ is a known function of time. In the case where the well pressure is known,
the internal pressure conditions at the well can be approximated in finite differences by
the equation (︀
𝐻2
𝑖+1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖−1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 +
+
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗+1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖,𝑗+0.5 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
κ𝑖,𝑗−0.5 =
=
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑐
)︀
𝐷𝑖,𝑗,𝑦 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑐
)︀
𝐷𝑖,𝑗,𝑥,
(17)
where
𝐷𝑖,𝑗,𝑥 = κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗
− 1
2𝜋
(︂
ln 𝑅𝑐
Δ𝑥 + 1.61
)︂, 𝐷 𝑖,𝑗,𝑦 = κ𝑖,𝑗+0.5 +κ𝑖,𝑗−0.5
− 1
2𝜋
(︂
ln 𝑅𝑐
Δ𝑦 + 1.61
)︂.
Formula (17) follows from (16), where the quantity𝑄 ℓ, in accordance with the above as-
sumption, is represented by the formula for steady plane-radial filtration. In dimensionless
form, (16) and (17) retain their original form with the notation
𝑄*
ℓ = 𝑄
𝐻2
𝑥·κ𝑥
,
where𝑄 *
ℓ is the dimensionless value of the withdrawal function.
For definiteness, we assume that the conditions at the well are of the form (16).
According to A. A. Samarskii’s locally one-dimensional method, we obtain the following
equations for each direction:
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖+1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
·κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖−1,𝑗−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
·κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 = 𝑄
2 ;
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗+1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
·κ𝑖,𝑗+0.5 +
(︀
𝐻2
𝑖,𝑗−1−𝐻 2
𝑖,𝑗
)︀
·κ𝑖,𝑗−0.5 = 𝑄
2.
(18)
From (18) it is easy to obtain the sweep coefficients for a singular node:
𝛼𝑖 = κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗
(κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗)−κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛼𝑖−1
;
𝛽𝑖 = κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛽𝑖−1− 1
2𝑄
(κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗)−κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛼𝑖−1
.
For the case of a given pressure, using similar reasoning, we obtain
𝛼𝑖 = κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗
(κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗)−κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛼𝑖−1
;𝛽 𝑖 = κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛽𝑖−1− 1
2𝑄
(κ𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗)−κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗·𝛼𝑖−1
.
A method for approximating the well conditions for a singular node was also investi-
gated:
𝑎𝑖 =κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗;𝑏 𝑖 =κ 𝑖+0.5,𝑗 +κ𝑖−0.5,𝑗 +𝜒 Δ𝑥2
2𝐻(𝑠)
𝑖,𝑗 Δ𝑡
;
𝑐𝑖 =κ 𝑖−0.5,𝑗;𝑑 𝑖 =𝜒 Δ𝑥2
2𝐻(2)
𝑖,𝑗,𝑘
𝐻(2)
𝑖,𝑗,𝑘+1 +𝜀Δ𝑥 2−𝑄.
98 Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
Using the approximation methods discussed, a model problem was solved for a do-
main with a square boundary and a single well located in the center. Based on the
proposed numerical algorithm, computational experiments were conducted on a comput-
ing cluster (Figs. 3–5). Preliminary calculations showed that for this class of problems,
A. A. Samarskii’s locally one-dimensional scheme can be successfully applied in combina-
tion with the symmetrization method. Approximating the boundary conditions at the
well using formula (18) ensures higher accuracy of the results.
Figure 3Change in groundwater level depending on the value of the infiltration parameter.
The curves in Fig. 3 show that the groundwater level decreases exponentially over time
depending on the infiltration coefficient. It is also observed that a significant decrease in
the groundwater level occurs at𝑡>65days, depending on the infiltration parameter.
Figure 4Change in groundwater level depending on the value of the evaporation parameter.
Figure 5Change in groundwater level for different values of the evaporation parameter.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration...99
Numerical calculations were also performed for various values of the evaporation co-
efficient from the daylight surface of the groundwater (Figs. 4, 5). The calculated curves
show that the groundwater level decreases as the evaporation coefficient increases. This
is especially noticeable at𝑡>35days.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, a minimizing functional is proposed for determining the values of the
parameters𝑞 0,𝑛,𝐻 cr and the main factors directly affecting groundwater level changes
(evaporation or infiltration).
Numerical calculations performed for model problems revealed that the best results
are obtained using the symmetrization principle.
A model problem for a symmetric domain with a square boundary and a square in-
filtration region located at the center was considered. Analysis of the results showed
that, for a constant infiltration coefficient, the infiltration front propagates absolutely
symmetrically in time within the considered infiltration region, as expected from physical
considerations.
It was established that A. A. Samarskii’s locally one-dimensional scheme is effective
for this class of problems and can be recommended for solving modeling, forecasting, and
other problems for real hydrogeological objects.
Numerical calculations also showed that for this class of problems, A. A. Samarskii’s
locally one-dimensional scheme can be successfully applied in combination with the sym-
metrization method.
Declarations
Conflicts of interest.The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data availability .The data are available from the authors on reasonable request.
References
[1] World404. Mirovye zapasy presnoy vody [World reserves of fresh water]. A vailable at:
https://world404.com/vodnye-resursy/mirovye-zapasy-presnoj-vody/.
[2] Russian International Affairs Council. Nekhvatka presnoy vody stanovitsya krup-
neyshey mirovoy problemoy [Fresh water shortage is becoming the biggest global prob-
lem]. A vailable at:https://russiancouncil.ru/analytics-and-comments/comments/
nekhvatka-presnoy-vody-stanovitsya-krupneyshey-mirovoy-problemoy/.
[3] Rubryka. Pit’yevaya voda [Drinking water]: infographics. A vailable at:https://rubryka.
com/ru/infographics/pytevaya-voda/.
[4] Aniskin N. A., Sergeev S. A. 2022. Chislennye resheniya zadach neustanovivsheysya fil’tratsii
v gidrotekhnike [Numerical solutions of unsteady seepage problems in hydraulic engineering].
Vestnik MGSU. 17(1): 104–115. (In Russian)
[5] Ravshanov N., Abdullaev Z. S., Khafizov O. Ya. 2020. Modelirovanie fil’tratsii podzem-
nykh vod v mnogosloynykh poristykh sredakh [Modeling of groundwater filtration in mul-
tilayer porous media].Stroitel’stvo unikal’nykh zdaniy i sooruzheniy. No. 7(92): Art. 9205.
doi:https://doi.org/10.18720/CUBS.92.5. (In Russian)
[6] Ravshanov N., Shadmanova K. 2025. Issledovanie matematicheskogo modelirovaniya prot-
sessov fil’tratsii podzemnykh vod v mnogosloynykh neodnorodnykh poristykh sredakh
[Study of mathematical modeling of groundwater filtration processes in multilayer hetero-
geneous porous media].Mezhdunarodnyy zhurnal teoreticheskikh i prikladnykh voprosov
tsifrovykh tekhnologiy. 8(1): 48–57. doi:https://doi.org/10.62132/ijdt.v8i1.232. (In
Russian)
100Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
[7] Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S., Shadmanova K. U., Zhurabaev Kh. A. 2025. Issledovanie i
analiz matematicheskikh modeley protsessov fil’tratsii podzemnykh vod v mnogosloynykh
neodnorodnykh poristykh sredakh [Study and analysis of mathematical models of ground-
water filtration processes in multilayer heterogeneous porous media].Problems of Compu-
tational and Applied Mathematics. No. 1(63): 41–56. (In Russian)
[8] Camara S. F., Zhou J., Zhang Y. 2025. Unstructured Modflow model for numerical simula-
tions of groundwater flow in three-dimensional Quaternary aquifer of Beijing Plain, China.
Water. 17(21): Art. 3162. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/w17213162.
[9] Hsieh P.-C., Lee P.-C. 2021. Analytical modeling of groundwater flow of vertically multi-
layered soil stratification in response to temporally varied rainfall recharge.Applied Math-
ematical Modelling. 95: 542–562. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2021.03.030.
[10] Yan B., Harp D. R., Chen B., Pawar R. 2021. A physics-constrained deep learning
model for simulating multiphase flow in 3D heterogeneous porous media. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.09467. doi:https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2105.09467.
[11] Petrovskyy D. [et al.] 2025. Enhanced permeability estimation in microporous rocks using
a hybrid macropore-Darcy approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02550. doi:https://doi.
org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.02550.
[12] Kmec J., Šír M. 2024. Modeling 2D gravity-driven flow in unsaturated porous media for
different infiltration rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10017. doi:https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2412.10017.
[13] Nazirova E. Sh., Karabaeva Kh. A. 2025. Numerical solution of the nonlinear groundwater
and pressurized water filtration problem.Problems of Computational and Applied Mathe-
matics. No. 3(67): 28–42. doi:https://doi.org/10.71310/pcam.3_67.2025.04.
[14] Daliev Sh., Urakov S., Elmurodov U., Xaitov O., Abbasova M. 2025. A three-dimensional
mathematical model for groundwater level variations in a two-layered medium.Engineering,
Technology and Applied Science Research. 15(5): 28368–28376. doi:https://doi.org/10.
48084/etasr.8123.
[15] Mukhamadiyev A., Karimov M., Sattarov O., Cho J. 2026. A nonlinear model of three-layer
groundwater flow with evaporation dependent on the critical groundwater level.Mathemat-
ics. 14(2): Art. 256. doi:https://doi.org/10.3390/math14020256.
[16] Biliaiev M. M., Kozachyna V. V. 2024. Modeling of filtration and heat and mass transfer
processes in groundwater.Science and Transport Progress. No. 2(109): 45–56. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.15802/stp2024/313664.
[17] Basniev K. S., Kochina I. N., Maksimov V. M. 1993.Podzemnaya gidromekhanika: uchebnik
dlya vuzov [Underground hydromechanics: a textbook for universities]. Moscow: Nedra.
416 p. (In Russian)
[18] Barry I. S. 1990.Flow in a deformable porous medium. Sydney: University of New South
Wales. 148 p.
[19] Ban A., Basniev K. S., Nikolaevskiy V. N. 1961. Ob osnovnykh uravneniyakh fil’tratsii v
szhimaemykh poristykh sredakh [On the basic equations of filtration in compressible porous
media].Prikladnaya mekhanika i tekhnicheskaya fizika. No. 3: 52–56. (In Russian)
[20] Buzinov S. N., Umrikhin I. D. 1973.Gidrodinamicheskie metody issledovaniya skvazhin i
plastov [Hydrodynamic methods of well and reservoir testing]. Moscow: Nedra. 269 p. (In
Russian)
Моделирование процесса нестационарной фильтрации...101
УДК 519.6
МОДЕЛИРОВАНИЕ ПРОЦЕССА НЕСТАЦИОНАРНОЙ
ФИЛЬТРАЦИИ ГРУНТОВЫХ ВОД СО СВОБОДНОЙ
ПОВЕРХНОСТЬЮ С УЧЁТОМ ИНФИЛЬТРАЦИОННЫХ
ПОТОКОВ
*Равшанов Н., Садуллаев С.
*ravshanzade-09@mail.ru
Научно-исследовательский институт развития цифровых технологий и искусственного
интеллекта,
100125, Узбекистан, г. Ташкент, м-в Буз-2, 17А
Предложена нелинейная математическая модель с граничными, начальными и
внутренними условиями для мониторинга и прогнозирования нестационарной филь-
трации грунтовых вод со свободной поверхностью с учётом инфильтрационных пото-
ков и гидродинамических параметров грунта. Для определения основных факторов,
непосредственно влияющих на изменение уровня грунтовых вод во времени, пред-
ставлен минимизируемый функционал, позволяющий определить диапазоны изме-
нения существенных параметров, в которых они оказывают значительное влияние
на процесс инфильтрации. Задача решается численно по локально-одномерной схе-
ме А. А. Самарского; численные эксперименты на модельных задачах показали, что
наилучшие результаты достигаются при применении принципа симметризации. Ре-
шена модельная задача для симметричной области с квадратной границей и квад-
ратной областью инфильтрации. Анализ результатов показал, что при постоянном
коэффициенте фильтрации фронт инфильтрации распространяется во времени абсо-
лютно симметрично в пределах рассматриваемой области фильтрации, что соответ-
ствует физическим представлениям. Установлено, что локально-одномерная схема
эффективна для данного класса задач, может успешно применяться в сочетании с
методом симметризации и может быть рекомендована для решения задач модели-
рования и прогнозирования режима грунтовых вод.
Ключевые слова:математическая модель, численный алгоритм, грунтовые воды,
вычислительные эксперименты, гидродинамические параметры, фронт инфильтра-
ции
Цитирование:Равшанов Н., Садуллаев С.Моделирование процесса нестационар-
ной фильтрации грунтовых вод со свободной поверхностью с учётом инфильтраци-
онных потоков // Проблемы вычислительной и прикладной математики. – 2026. –
№ 4(74). – С. 85-101.
DOI:10.71310/pcam.4_74.2026.05
ПРОБЛЕМЫ ВЫЧИСЛИТЕЛЬНОЙ И
ПРИКЛАДНОЙ МАТЕМАТИКИ
№ 4(74) 2026
Журнал основан в 2015 году.
Издается 6 раз в год.
Учредитель:
Научно-исследовательский институт развития цифровых технологий и
искусственного интеллекта.
Главный редактор:
Равшанов Н.
Заместители главного редактора:
Арипов М.М., Шадиметов Х.М., Ахмедов Д.Д.
Ответственный секретарь:
Убайдуллаев М.Ш.
Редакционный совет:
Азамов А.А., Алоев Р.Д., Амиргалиев Е.Н. (Казахстан), Арушанов М.Л.,
Бурнашев В.Ф., Джумаёзов У.З., Загребина С.А. (Россия), Задорин А.И. (Россия),
Игнатьев Н.А., Ильин В.П. (Россия), Иманкулов Т.С. (Казахстан),
Исмагилов И.И. (Россия), Кабанихин С.И. (Россия), Курбонов Н.М., Маматов Н.С.,
Мирзаев Н.М., Мурадов Ф.А., Назирова Э.Ш., Нормуродов Ч.Б., Нуралиев Ф.М.,
Опанасенко В.Н. (Украина), Расулмухамедов М.М., Садуллаева Ш.А.,
Старовойтов В.В. (Беларусь), Хаётов А.Р., Халджигитов А., Хамдамов Р.Х.,
Хужаев И.К., Хужаеров Б.Х., Эшмаматова Д.Б., Дустмуродова Ш.Ж.,
Чье Ен Ун (Россия), Шабозов М.Ш. (Таджикистан), Dimov I. (Болгария),
Li Y. (США), Mascagni M. (США), Min A. (Германия), Singh M. (Южная Корея).
Журнал зарегистрирован в Агентстве информации и массовых коммуникаций при
Администрации Президента Республики Узбекистан.
Свидетельство №0856 от 5 августа 2015 года.
ISSN 2181-8460, eISSN 2181-046X
При перепечатке материалов ссылка на журнал обязательна.
За точность фактов и достоверность информации ответственность несут авторы.
Адрес редакции:
100125, г. Ташкент, м-в. Буз-2, 17А.
Тел.: +(998) 71 263-41-98.
Э-почта:journals@airi.uz.
Веб-сайт:https://journals.airi.uz.
Дизайн и вёрстка:
Шарипов Х.Д.
Отпечатано в типографии НИИ РЦТИИ.
Подписано в печать 25.08.2026 г.
Формат 60х84 1/8. Заказ № 4. Тираж 100 экз.
PROBLEMS OF COMPUTATIONAL AND
APPLIED MATHEMATICS
No. 4(74) 2026
The journal was established in 2015.
6 issues are published per year.
Founder:
Digital Technologies and Artificial Intelligence Development Research Institute.
Editor-in-Chief:
Ravshanov N.
Deputy Editors:
Aripov M.M., Shadimetov Kh.M., Akhmedov D.D.
Executive Secretary:
Ubaydullaev M.Sh.
Editorial Council:
Azamov A.A., Aloev R.D., Amirgaliev E.N. (Kazakhstan), Arushanov M.L.,
Burnashev V.F., Djumayozov U.Z., Zagrebina S.A. (Russia), Zadorin A.I. (Russia),
Ignatiev N.A., Ilyin V.P. (Russia), Imankulov T.S. (Kazakhstan), Ismagilov I.I. (Russia),
Kabanikhin S.I. (Russia), Kurbonov N.M., Mamatov N.S., Mirzaev N.M., Muradov F.A.,
Nazirova E.Sh., Normurodov Ch.B., Nuraliev F.M., Opanasenko V.N. (Ukraine),
Sadullaeva Sh.A., Starovoitov V.V. (Belarus), Khayotov A.R., Khaldjigitov A.,
Khamdamov R.Kh., Khujaev I.K., Khujayorov B.Kh., Eshmamatova D.B.,
Dustmurodova Sh.J., Chye En Un (Russia), Shabozov M.Sh. (Tajikistan),
Dimov I. (Bulgaria), Li Y. (USA), Mascagni M. (USA), Min A. (Germany),
Singh M. (South Korea).
The journal is registered by Agency of Information and Mass Communications under the
Administration of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan.
Certificate of Registration No. 0856 of 5 August 2015.
ISSN 2181-8460, eISSN 2181-046X
At a reprint of materials the reference to the journal is obligatory.
Authors are responsible for the accuracy of the facts and reliability of the information.
Address:
100125, Tashkent, Buz-2, 17A.
Tel.: +(998) 71 263-41-98.
Е-mail:journals@airi.uz.
Web-site:https://journals.airi.uz.
Layout design:
Sharipov Kh.D.
DTAIRI printing office.
Signed for print 25.08.2026
Format 60х84 1/8. Order No. 4. Print run of 100 copies.
Содержание
Ахмедов Д.Д., Туркменова Р.Т.
Моделирование мезомасштабного переноса мелкодисперсной примеси в ат-
мосфере с учётом стохастических пульсаций ветра . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Чжан Х., Варламова Л.П., У Б.
Динамический анализ стохастической SICR-модели передачи раннего и
позднего фитофтороза картофеля . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Равшанов Н., Шафиев Т.Р., Бобожонова М.А., Кобилова Д.О.
Исследование ключевых факторов, влияющих на распространение пылевых
частиц в атмосфере . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Бердиёров Ш.Ш., Эрмонова М.У.
Сравнение методов конечных разностей и конечных объёмов для численного
моделирования фильтрации в цилиндрическом пористом фильтре . . . . . . 65
Равшанов Н., Садуллаев С.
Моделирование процесса нестационарной фильтрации грунтовых вод со сво-
бодной поверхностью с учётом инфильтрационных потоков . . . . . . . . . . 85
Туракулов Ж.А., Жураев И.Р., Таштемирова Н.Н., Рахматуллаева Д.О.
Математическое моделирование фильтрации суспензии в пористых средах . 102
Хаётов А.Р., Исмоилов С.И.
Квадратурная формула для оптимального приближения определенных ин-
тегралов с полиномиальным весом . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Нуралиев Ф.А., Едилбекова Р.М.
Оптимальная квадратурная формула в пространстве дифференцируемых
функций . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
Эшмаматова Д.Б., Очилова Н.К.
Вырожденно-сингулярные эллиптические операторы: точная коэрцитивность,
весовая корректность и методы функции Грина для моделей диффузии в
опухолевых тканях . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Назирова Э.Ш., Мадетбаева Н.Б., Мирзаева Ф.Ш., Исломова М.Б.
Математическая модель автоматического выделения фразеологизмов в тюрк-
ских языках . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Ахмеджанова Д.А.
Модель семантического связывания тюркских языков: подход с ограничени-
ем справедливости для малоресурсных условий . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
Contents
Akhmedov D.D., Turkmenova R.T.
Modeling mesoscale transport of fine particulate matter in the atmosphere ac-
counting for stochastic wind fluctuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Zhang H., Varlamova L.P., Wu B.
Dynamical analysis of a stochastic SICR transmission model for potato early and
late blight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Ravshanov N., Shafiev T.R., Bobozhonova M.A., Kobilova D.O.
Study of the key factors affecting the dispersion of dust particles in the atmosphere 47
Berdiyorov Sh.Sh., Ermonova M.U.
Comparison of finite difference and finite volume methods for numerical simula-
tion of filtration in a cylindrical porous filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Ravshanov N., Sadullaev S.
Modeling of the process of unsteady filtration of groundwater with a free surface
taking into account infiltration flows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Turakulov J.A., Juraev I.R., Tashtemirova N.N., Raxmatullayeva D.O.
Mathematical modeling of suspension filtration in porous media . . . . . . . . . 102
Hayotov A.R., Ismoilov S.I.
Optimal quadrature for definite integrals with polynomial weight . . . . . . . . . 110
Nuraliev F.A., Edilbekova R.M.
Optimal quadrature formula in the space of differentiable functions . . . . . . . . 120
Eshmamatova D.B., Ochilova N.K.
Degenerate-singular elliptic operators: sharp coercivity, weighted well-posedness,
and Green’s function methods for tumor-diffusion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
Nazirova E.Sh., Madetbayeva N.B., Mirzayeva F.Sh., Islomova M.B.
A mathematical model for the automatic extraction of idioms in Turkic languages152
Akhmedjanova D.A.
A semantic linking model for Turkic languages: a fairness-constrained cross-
lingual approach for low-resource settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171