Global biodiversity loss affects all animal groups and biogeographical regions, and is higher in freshwater environments than in any other natural habitat. Insect biomass, species richness and abundance are declining globally, and all areas in the UK have experienced a net insect species loss and community composition change since 1970 CE. The dramatic decrease in insect abundance and species richness since the 1980s threatens ecosystem functioning and services, and has led to the coining of the term “Insect Armageddon”. Information on insect declines is only based on short-term monitoring datasets, typically spanning less than 50 years, whereas human impacts date back to ca. 6000 years BP. This limits understanding of the magnitude of Insect Armageddon. A palaeoecological approach, in this case using chironomid (non-biting midge) sub-fossils, allows anthropogenic drivers to be disentangled over a multi-decadal to millennial timescales. In this study, centennial-scale chironomid community dynamics are reconstructed for 16 UK lakes, with a focus on post-industrial human impacts. First, the impact of individual drivers (e.g. industry, tourism) on the chironomid communities of eight lakes were studied. All drivers impacted chironomid community composition and diversity, with eutrophication having the greatest impact. Secondly, six meres in the West Midlands, experiencing recent eutrophication, were selected in order to further explore the impacts on chironomids. Despite similarities in climate, depth, and geology of the lakes, chironomid compositional changes had different directions and magnitude between sites. Finally, three sites with multiple intersecting drivers were studied at higher resolution. The records show sensitive ecosystem responses to eutrophication, mining, and restoration efforts, allowing the identification of natural baselines and appropriate sampling resolutions. The results presented in this study contribute to a deeper understanding of insect diversity dynamics, and inform conservation and mitigation strategies for freshwater lake ecosystems.