The increase in continental shelf hypoxia (oxygen concentration < 2 mg l -1 ) throughout the world is primarily a result of land-sourced nutrient enrichment. The well-recognized consequences to food webs, commercial fisheries, and economies vary according to the duration, frequency and severity of oxygen depletion. The increased nutrient loading of the Mississippi River into the northern Gulf of Mexico (a.k.a., ‘Gulf of America’) in the mid-1970s causes the formation of the largest hypoxic zone in the western Atlantic Ocean. The reported data on oxygen monitoring in this region is largely from biweekly to annual sampling, and so we infer how variable and consistent hypoxia is during years, seasons or months, but not among days. We increased knowledge of the temporal variability in the area by deploying water quality meters on the inner Louisiana continental shelf to record, at 15-minute intervals, dissolved oxygen, percent O 2 saturation, temperature, salinity, and conductivity at two locations in 20-m water depth from 1989 to 2010. Data were collected over 5975 days from 137 of 160 deployments lasting an average of 43.6 ± 2.2 days. Hypoxia was observed in all months, but not all months in all years had hypoxia. Hypoxia was present on 34% of the deployment days; 63% of those hypoxic days had oxygen concentrations < 1 mg l -1 , and 35% of the hypoxic days had oxygen concentration approximately = 0 mg l -1 . The peak occurrence in the percentage of days that were hypoxic coincided with the annual hypoxia cruise occurring in the last week of July and the lowest percentage was in November to February. Hypoxia persisted for at least 30 d or more in summer, with shorter periods of 2 to 12 d following reoxygenation from water column mixing or advection of a higher dissolved oxygen water mass to the area. It can be assumed that dissolved oxygen concentrations are extremely low over a broad area of the inner continental shelf west of the Mississippi River over extended periods and are sufficiently low to stress or kill demersal and infaunal organisms.