Anthropogenic activity and millennial climate variability affect Holocene mercury deposition of an alpine wetland near the largest mercury mine in China 
 
 
 influx )) during the Holocene in the Fanjingshan Mountain, which is only 65 km to the Wanshan Mercury Min, using a ~0.5 m alpine wetland sediment core. Our record showed an abrupt, rapid increase in Hg concentration since 2500 cal yr BP, suggesting that Hg mining in southwest China may have started before the establishment of the Qin dynasty. Estimated Hg influx was highly variable before the Neolithic period. Two major Hg influx peaks were found during the periods 10,000 - 6,000 and 6,000 - 3,800 cal yr BP, with an increase in Hg deposition by a factor of 4-8. We speculate that critical millennial-scale climate changes, i.e., the Holocene Climatic Optimum (HCO) and the Mid-Holocene Transition (MHT), were the potential triggers of these two Hg influx peaks. This study highlights the importance of climatic variability and local Hg mining in controlling atmospheric Hg deposition during the Holocene."> 
 
 Saltar al contingut principal
 Comunitats i col·leccions Navega per tot el DD Estadístiques Com publicar Contacte English Español Català Iniciar sessió Iniciar sessió Nou Usuari? Feu clic aquí per registrar-se Has oblidat la teva contrasenya? Identificació UB
 Inici Recerca Dinàmica de la Terra i de l'Oceà Articles publicats en revistes (Dinàmica de la Terra i l'Oceà) Anthropogenic activity and millennial climate variability affect Holocene mercury deposition of an alpine wetland near the largest mercury mine in China Fitxers 256023.pdf (2.9 MB) Tipus de document Article Versió Versió acceptada Data de publicació 2023-03-01 Llicència de publicació Si us plau utilitzeu sempre aquest identificador per citar o enllaçar aquest document: https://hdl.handle.net/2445/208362 Anthropogenic activity and millennial climate variability affect Holocene mercury deposition of an alpine wetland near the largest mercury mine in China Títol de la revista Autors Peng, Haijun Rong, Yimeng Chen, Di Sun, Ruiyang Huang, Jie Ding, Hanwei Olid Garcia, Carolina Yan, Haiyu Director/Tutor Contribució addicional ISSN de la revista Títol del volum Resum Mercury (Hg) is a volatile heavy metal that can be transported globally through the atmosphere and has a significant harmful impact on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Mining is one of the most important anthropogenic Hg contaminant sources worldwide, which has been shown to cause adverse ecological effects in Hg-mined areas. However, the dynamics in Hg deposition in the largest Hg mine in China and their driving forces remain poorly explored. Here we reconstruct the atmospheric Hg depositional fluxes (named here Hg influx (Hg influx )) during the Holocene in the Fanjingshan Mountain, which is only 65 km to the Wanshan Mercury Min, using a ~0.5 m alpine wetland sediment core. Our record showed an abrupt, rapid increase in Hg concentration since 2500 cal yr BP, suggesting that Hg mining in southwest China may have started before the establishment of the Qin dynasty. Estimated Hg influx was highly variable before the Neolithic period. Two major Hg influx peaks were found during the periods 10,000 - 6,000 and 6,000 - 3,800 cal yr BP, with an increase in Hg deposition by a factor of 4-8. We speculate that critical millennial-scale climate changes, i.e., the Holocene Climatic Optimum (HCO) and the Mid-Holocene Transition (MHT), were the potential triggers of these two Hg influx peaks. This study highlights the importance of climatic variability and local Hg mining in controlling atmospheric Hg deposition during the Holocene. Més... Recurs relacionat https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2023.137855 Matèries Mines , Mines de mercuri , Climatologia , Holocè Matèries (anglès) Mines and mineral resources , Mercury mines , Climatology , Holocene Citació Col·leccions Articles publicats en revistes (Dinàmica de la Terra i l'Oceà) Pàgina completa de l'ítem Citació ISO 690 APA MLA Chicago/Turabian Vancouver IEEE BibTeX RIS PENG, Haijun, et al. Anthropogenic activity and millennial climate variability affect Holocene mercury deposition of an alpine wetland near the largest mercury mine in China. Chemosphere . 2023. Vol. 316. ISSN 0045-6535. [consulted: 10 of October of 2026]. Available at: https://hdl.handle.net/2445/208362 Estadístiques Exportar metadades JSON - METS Compartir registre Coordinació: CRAI UB Avís legal Metadades subjectes a: Configuració de cookies Política de privadesa Acord d'usuari final