Trees planted in urban areas provide a wide range of ecosystem services. Information to guide species selection is still limited in decision-making. In particular, knowledge remains scarce about the relationships between nutrient demands and growth in urban trees. Our study estimates nutrient-use efficiency and nutrient sequestration for eight representative urban tree species in South Korea. The eight urban tree species were classified into three functional types: deciduous needle-leaved species ( Ginkgo biloba and Metasequoia glyptostroboides ), evergreen conifers ( Pinus densiflora , P . strobus , and Thuja occidentalis ), and deciduous broad-leaved species ( Prunus yedoensis , Zelkova serrata , and Acer palmatum ). Destructively harvesting 73 trees, we determined dry weight, carbon, and nutrient concentrations for each tree compartment. Biomass allocation among sampled tree species was as follows: roots (33%), stem wood (30%), branches (27%), foliage (6%), and stem bark (4%). Carbon concentrations were highest in stem wood and lowest in roots ( p &amp;lt; 0.05), whereas nutrient concentrations were generally lowest in stem wood. Variations between plant functional types were greater than those between species. Nitrogen-use efficiency for producing stem wood carbon and root carbon was highest in evergreen conifers, followed by deciduous needle-leaved species and deciduous broad-leaved species. The highest carbon and nutrient sequestrations were observed in deciduous needle-leaved species. In particular, M . glyptostroboides and P . yedoensis showed greater carbon and nitrogen sequestration than P . densiflora , T. occidentalis , and A . palmatum . Calcium and magnesium sequestration were highest in bark and branches and in deciduous needle-leaved species. Observing both higher nutrient-use efficiency and carbon sequestration indicated limited nutrient supply in urban areas, suggesting that nutrient-use efficiency can inform species selection to sustain growth in urban environments.