Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy has revolutionized the treatment of hematologic malignancies. However, its application to solid tumors remains a challenge, in part due to the immunosuppressive nature of the tumor microenvironment (TME). Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been identified as a contributor of immunosuppression within the TME, acting as a novel immune checkpoint affecting T cell function. This study aims at disrupting prostaglandin receptors E2 (EP2) and E4 (EP4) expression on CAR T cells to enhance their efficacy in solid tumors. Using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, CAR T cells with a single or double knockout of EP2 and EP4 were generated. In vitro experiments evaluated the effects of PGE2 on CAR T cell proliferation, activation, and cytotoxicity. To probe the hypothesis in a clinically relevant setting, tumor growth and survival studies using xenograft models, along with in vivo T cell tracking to analyze the persistence of EP2/EP4-defficient CAR T cells, were conducted. We successfully generated human EP2 and EP4 knockout CAR T cells, which demonstrated loss of PGE2 signaling, as demonstrated by the suppression of intracellular cAMP production and CREB phosphorylation. While unmodified CAR T cells experienced a PGE2-induced reduction in proliferation, their activation capacity remained intact. The decreased CAR T cell numbers ultimately impaired their anti-tumor activity both in vitro and in vivo. However, this suppression was reversed in EP2/EP4-deficient CAR T cells, resulting in their increased accumulation within tumors and prolonged survival of treated mice. Our findings demonstrate the detrimental effects of PGE2-mediated suppression on CAR T cells within the TME and propose a suitable strategy to circumvent this effect. The CRISPR/Cas9-based knockout of EP2 and EP4 offers a promising strategy to shield CAR T cells from PGE2 without disrupting essential physiological functions. These findings support further exploration of this approach as a novel therapeutic strategy against solid tumors.