This study explored the impact of fortifying yogurt with varying concentrations (10% and 20%) of barley, oats, and quinoa pastes. This study aimed to improve yogurt’s nutritional, physicochemical, sensory, and antioxidant attributes, evaluating all fortified samples over a 28-day refrigerated storage period. The prepared yogurt, fortified with roasted barley paste (RBP), roasted oats paste (ROP), and roasted quinoa paste (RQP), was comprehensively assessed for its chemical, nutritional, and phytochemical content as well as its microbiological stability and sensory attributes. Results indicated that fortification with RBP, ROP, and RQP significantly improved the nutritional profile of yogurt, increasing levels of total solids, proteins, ash, and fiber. Additionally, the addition of these pastes resulted in a significant increase in phenolic compounds and antioxidant activity (p &lt; 0.05). Phenolic compounds and 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH, %) were maximum in yogurt with 20% RBP or RQP throughout all storage periods, compared to control yogurt (p &lt; 0.05). The pastes did not negatively affect the viability or stability of yogurt’s starter cultures, such as Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-05, which maintained a robust cell count of 6.80 to 8.53 log CFU/mL throughout the storage period (p &gt; 0.05). This suggests that the fortified yogurt maintains its beneficial probiotic properties and leads to substantial physicochemical improvement. The fortified yogurt showed a wider range of amino acids, a more desirable texture, and better water-holding capacity, leading to a significant reduction in syneresis (whey separation), compared to control yogurt. This study demonstrates that fortifying yogurt with barley, oats, and quinoa pastes successfully creates a novel, value-added fermented milk product with potential functional properties. Incorporating these pastes enhances yogurt’s nutritional and func-tional properties without compromising the viability of beneficial starter cultures, highlighting its strong potential in the health-promoting food market.