How can hydrogels 
remove heavy metal 
pollution from 
wastewater?
Dr Ruben Octavio Munoz Garcia, Dr Diego Alberto 
Lomeli Rosales and Dr Juan Carlos Sanchez Díaz
www.futurumcareers.com
E D C M
Research • Terminology
Inspiring the 
next generation
© eduantoniarda/Shutterstock.com
futurum
How can hydrogels remove heavy metal 
pollution f
rom wastewater?
I
ndustrial processes often generate wastewater that is contaminated with pollutants such as heavy metals 
and toxic chemicals. Before this water can be released into the surrounding environment, it must be treated to 
remove these harmful substances. At Universidad de Guadalajara in Mexico, Dr Ruben Octavio Munoz Garcia, 
Dr Diego Alberto Lomeli Rosales and Dr Juan Carlos Sanchez Díaz are developing innovative hydrogels that 
can remove toxic heavy metals from wastewater. 
PROFILES
Dr Ruben Octavio 
Munoz Garcia
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry
Environmental 
chemistry
Dr Diego Alberto 
Lomeli Rosales
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry
Dr Juan Carlos 
Sanchez Díaz
Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering
Centro de Ciencias Exactas e Ingenierias
Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico
Fields of research
Chemistry; hydrogels
Research paper
A Poly(Acrylic Acid)-Based Hydrogel 
Crosslinked with Hydroxypropylcellulose as 
a Clarifying Agent in Nickel(II) Solutions. 
(2025) doi: 10.3390/gels11070560
Funder
Universidad de Guadalajara 
(PROSNII-2026)
doi: 10.33424/FUTURUM726
 Talk like an ... 
environmental chemist
Adsorption – when molecules 
from a gas or liquid stick to the 
outer surface of a material
Carboxylate group – a 
negatively charged chemical 
group (formed when a carboxylic 
acid group loses a hydrogen 
ion) that can attract and bind 
positively charged heavy metal 
ions
Heavy metal – a metallic 
element with a relatively high 
atomic weight and density that 
can be toxic to living organisms 
and pollute the environment 
Hydroxypropylcellulose 
– a modified form of cellulose
used to improve stability
Ion – an atom or molecule that 
has an electrical charge because it 
has lost or gained electrons
Polymer – a long, chain-like 
molecule made from thousands of 
smaller molecules
Sodium hydroxide – a 
highly corrosive powder used in 
many cleaning products
Solvent – a liquid that 
dissolves another substance to 
form a solution
Wastewater – a byproduct 
generated by many industrial 
processes that often contains 
pollutants
A
ll over the world, 
our waters are being 
polluted by toxic heavy 
metals that pose a 
threat both to aquatic ecosystems 
and human health. Many industries, 
such as chemical manufacturing and 
textile production, release wastewater 
into their surrounding environments 
and local sewage systems. Although 
there are regulations designed to 
prevent this pollution, many factories 
and manufacturing plants still release 
untreated wastewater that is full of 
heavy metals. 
“This wastewater can pollute soil and 
groundwater and contaminate rivers 
and lakes,” says Dr Ruben Octavio 
Munoz Garcia from Universidad de 
Guadalajara. “In some cases, heavy 
metals have even been found in fish.” 
Drinking contaminated water and 
eating contaminated fish can cause 
serious health problems, including 
kidney and blood diseases.
Alongside his colleagues Dr Diego 
Alberto Lomeli Rosales and Dr Juan 
Carlos Sanchez Díaz, Ruben is 
improving a technique for 
removing heavy metals from contaminated 
wastewater. 
How to treat industrial 
wastewater
“Current methods for treating industrial 
wastewater are often expensive, generate 
secondary waste and require large amounts 
of energy or chemicals,” says Diego. “Many 
of these methods are also not particularly 
effective at removing low concentrations of 
heavy metals.” 
To overcome these limitations, Ruben, 
Diego and Juan are developing a new 
wastewater treatment technique based on 
hydrogels – three-dimensional networks 
of polymers that can hold large amounts 
of water while maintaining their structural 
integrity. “To remove heavy metals from 
wastewater, hydrogels are placed in a 
solution containing heavy metal ions,” 
explains Juan. “After a short period of 
time, the swollen hydrogel is taken out of 
the solution, removing the adsorbed heavy 
metals from the water.” 
How hydrogels work
“The ability of hydrogels to adsorb heavy 
metal ions depends on the number of 
active binding sites,” explains Ruben. 
“Increasing the number of these binding 
sites enhances the adsorption potential 
of the hydrogel.” Another way to make 
hydrogels more effective is to improve their 
structural integrity. This can be done by a 
process known as crosslinking. 
“Crosslinking is the chemical process in 
which two or more polymer chains are 
bonded together,” explains Diego. “The 
structural integrity of the hydrogel is 
provided by the three-dimensional polymer 
network formed through crosslinking.” 
Without crosslinking, the polymer chains 
would simply dissolve in the water. By 
bonding the polymers together, they form 
interconnected networks that swell in water 
rather than dissolving. 
The amount of crosslinking in a hydrogel 
determines how stable it is and how much 
water it can adsorb. A hydrogel with lots of 
crosslinking will be structurally stable but 
able to hold less water. On the other hand, 
a hydrogel with less crosslinking will be able 
to hold much more water, but is more likely 
to deform and release the captured water. 
Ruben, Diego and Juan are investigating 
new methods for creating hydrogels that 
The team’s hydrogel decontaminated a solution containing 
nickel ions, turning green in the process.
can adsorb large amounts of water while 
maintaining their structural integrity. 
How to make hydrogels 
more effective
“We incorporated cellulose into our 
hydrogels to improve their structural 
stability during the adsorption process,” 
says Juan. “It acts as a reinforcing 
component, helping the hydrogel retain its 
shape during adsorption.” Cellulose is the 
structural component of plant cell walls 
and is the most abundant natural polymer 
in the world, making it an affordable and 
sustainable material. 
Cellulose has a highly organised molecular 
structure and tight internal hydrogen 
bonds, making it incredibly tough and 
durable. However, this toughness also 
means that it cannot dissolve in water 
or organic solvents, making it difficult to 
incorporate into hydrogels. To overcome 
this problem, Ruben, Diego and Juan 
used a modified form of cellulose called 
hydroxypropylcellulose in their hydrogels.
Turning cellulose into hydroxypropylcellulose 
involves breaking just enough of its 
hydrogen bonds to make it soluble in water 
and solvents while maintaining some of its 
structural integrity. This solubility allows 
it to easily graft onto the polymer chains 
that make up a hydrogel, transferring 
its structural strength to the hydrogel. 
Hydroxypropylcellulose allows the hydrogel 
to maintain its structure in industrial 
treatment pumps where there is high water 
pressure and rapid flow. 
How a hydrogel captures 
heavy metals
Ruben, Diego and Juan used a polymerised 
form of acrylic acid as the backbone 
of their hydrogel. “We converted the 
carboxylic acid groups on these polymers 
into negatively charged carboxylate groups 
by treating them with sodium hydroxide 
solutions,” explains Ruben. “These 
carboxylate groups act like tiny molecular 
claws, surrounding and tightly holding 
heavy metal ions.”
The combination of carboxylate traps and 
hydroxypropylcellulose reinforcement 
made the team’s hydrogel particularly 
efficient. “In our lab, we performed 
adsorption tests on our hydrogel in a 
solution containing nickel ions,” says Diego. 
“Our hydrogel decontaminated the green 
nickel solution after a quick adsorption 
process, turning green itself in the process.” 
The hydrogel adsorbed up to 80% of the 
nickel ions present in the solution, showing 
how effectively it can remove heavy metals 
from water. 
Ruben, Diego and Juan hope that their 
innovative hydrogels will allow industries 
to clean their wastewater more effectively 
and at a lower cost, protecting surrounding 
environments, local wildlife and nearby 
communities. 
These carboxylate groups 
act like tiny molecular 
claws, surrounding and 
tightly holding heavy 
metal ions.
V +44 117 909 9150
k info@futurumcareers.com 
D www.futurumcareers.com futurum